![](media/image1.png)

PRACTICAL

COMPLIANCE

Copyright Â© 2017 Linux Foundation

All rights reserved. This book or any portion thereof may not be
reproduced or used in any manner whatsoever without the express
written permission of the publisher except for the use of brief
quotations in a book review and certain other noncommercial uses
permitted by copyright law.

Printed in the United States of America First Edition, 2017

ISBN: 978-0-9989078-0-2

1 Letterman Drive Building D

Suite D4700

San Francisco CA 94129 Phone/Fax: +1 415 723 9709
https://linuxfoundation.org

## About the Authors

##### ![](media/image4.png){width="1.189915791776028in" height="1.1631802274715661in"}Shane Coughlan

Shane Coughlan is an expert in communi- cation, security, and business
development. His professional accomplishments include spearheading the
licensing team that elevated Open Invention Network into the largest
patent non-aggression community in

history, establishing the leading professional network of open source
legal experts, and aligning stakeholders to launch both the first law
journal and the first law book dedicated to open source. He currently
leads the OpenChain community as Program Manager.

Shane has extensive knowledge of open source governance, internal
process development, supply chain management, and community building.
His experience includes engagement with the enterprise, embedded,
mobile, and automotive industries.

##### ![](media/image5.png){width="1.189915791776028in" height="1.1560968941382328in"}Armijn Hemel

Armijn Hemel is the owner of Tjaldur Software Governance Solutions. He
is an active re- searcher of and internationally recognized expert in
open source license compliance and supply chain management. He studied
computer science at Utrecht University in

The Netherlands, where he pioneered reproducible builds with NixOS. In
the past he served on the board of NLUUG and was a member of the
coreteam of gpl-violations.org. Currently he is a board member at
NixOS Foundation.

## To Kate, for tirelessly driving the compliance community forward

ARMIJN HEMEL

## To Lana, who has a sense of curiosity that spans the whole world

SHANE COUGHLAN

# "Don't Panic."

DOUGLAS ADAMS

## Introduction

Practical GPL Compliance is a compliance guide for startups, small
businesses, and engineers, particularly focused on complying with the
versions of the GNU General Public License (GPL). It is designed for
engineers shipping products with GPL-licensed software included (e.g.,
consumer electronics, drones, IoT devices). Its goal is to provide
practical information to quickly address common issues. It is intended
to be useful for solving real-world challenges rather than providing
perfection in an imperfect world and to serve as the basis for
empowering a compliance engineer or compliance team to get their job
done as efficiently as possible. Hopefully, the practices laid out in
this guide will assist you in complying with other open source license
terms as well.

This book begins by introducing the tools used to practice GPL
compliance. It then expands on the goals of our approach, and follows
with an explanation of how to accomplish those goals. It continues
with a "checklist" of pitfalls frequently encountered by compliance
engineers and a list of steps that can be applied in common situations
when releasing a product or product family. It ends with some handy
flowcharts to visualize key approaches or best practices.

If you have a physical copy of this book, it should end up as a
battered, dog-eared reference text lurking beside your keyboard. If
you have a digital copy, it should be something that appears in your
favorites list or your desktop. Compliance engineering is not
something easily memorized and finished. It is a process

--- an approach backed by tools and knowledge of best practices

--- and we do best in this field when we continually refresh and hone
our skills.

Thankfully, compliance engineering is no longer a "black box" mastered
by only a few. Today, with texts like this or *Open Source*

*Compliance in the Enterprise*1, every engineer can support the
excellent use of third-party code. Licenses like the GPL, once
regarded as challenging to fully adhere to, can become understandable
and addressable by large and small entities alike.

Practical GPL Compliance and Open Source Compliance in the Enterprise
work together to help engineers, startups, small companies, and
enterprises master open source license compliance. However, they do
not exist in isolation, and you can find more materials via the Linux
Foundation Open Compliance Program at
[**https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org**](https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org/).
To get you started, Appendix 1 contains an overview of other
publications available and a list of useful compliance templates.

You may also be interested in Appendix 2: Compliance Standards,
Appendix 3: Professional Networks, and Appendix 4: Tools and
Infrastructure. There is a wealth of free resources available via The
Linux Foundation and from other parties to ensure that knowledge of
best practices and processes is readily available to you. Or..., just
go to the next page and get started right away with our cheat sheet.

1.  [**http://go.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-compliance-ebook**](http://go.linuxfoundation.org/open-source-compliance-ebook)

## The GPL Compliance Engineer Task-Based Cheat Sheet

No time to read a book? Welcome to our world. We suggest copying this
page, pinning it to your desk, and using it as a shortcut for getting
things done.

[What you need to do 2](#context)

[The tools you can use 6](#toolbox)

[How to deal with binary code 8](#_bookmark4)

[Find problem binaries 10](#source-code-analysis-and-rebuild)

[Rebuilding a binary 14](#performing-a-rebuild)

[Finding incorrectly licensed code
19](#finding-incorrectly-licensed-code)

[Common pitfalls 22](#_bookmark8)

[Releasing software 37](#_bookmark17)

[Buying software 42](#_bookmark22)

[Building a FOSS code center 48](#_bookmark26)

[Get checklists to help 52](#checklists)

[Get flowcharts to help 54](#step-4)

## Table of Contents

##### [Chapter 1: Approach 1](#_bookmark0)

[Context 2](#context)

[Compliance Requirements 3](#_bookmark2)

[Compliance Goals 3](#_bookmark2)

[Toolbox 6](#toolbox)

[Analysis of Binary Files 8](#_bookmark4)

[Source Code Analysis and Rebuild
10](#source-code-analysis-and-rebuild)

##### [Chapter 2: Common Pitfalls 22](#_bookmark8)

[Pitfall #1: Toolchain 23](#pitfall-1-toolchain)

[Pitfall #2: Android 24](#_bookmark10)

[Pitfall #3: "Out of tree" Linux Kernel Modules 27](#iproute2)

[Pitfall #4: Rescue Mode/Install Mode Systems
30](#pitfall-4-rescue-modeinstall-mode-systems)

[Pitfall #5: Bootloader 31](#pitfall-5-bootloader)

[Pitfall #6: Missing Build System 31](#pitfall-5-bootloader)

[Pitfall #7: Incorrect or Missing BusyBox Configuration Files
32](#_bookmark14)

[Pitfall #8: Incorrect or Missing Linux Kernel Configuration Files
33](#_bookmark15)

[Pitfall #9: Not Including the Version Number in Firmware and
35](#_bookmark16)

[Source Code Archive Names](#_bookmark16)

##### [Chapter 3: Scenarios for Releasing Software 37](#_bookmark17)

[Scenario #1: Software On A Device/Offline Distribution
38](#scenario-1-software-on-a-deviceoffline-distribution)

[Scenario #2: Providing A Manual Download From Website
39](#_bookmark19)

[Scenario #3: Providing An Automatic Download/ 40](#_bookmark20)

[Over The Air](#_bookmark20)

[Scenario #4: Field Engineer Applied Updates 41](#_bookmark21)

[Chapter 4: Scenarios for Buying Software 42](#_bookmark22)

[Context 43](#context-1)

[Scenario #1: SupplyChain Solutions For SoC Vendors 43](#context-1)

[Scenario #2: Supply Chain Solutions For ODMs 45](#_bookmark24)

[Scenario #3: Supply Chain Solutions For Others 46](#_bookmark25)

[Chapter 5: Building a FOSS Code Center 48](#_bookmark26)

[Context 49](#context-2)

["FOSS Code Center" As A Requirement 49](#context-2)

[Keep Firmware And Source Code Together 50](#_bookmark28)

[Chapter 6: Tracking Tasks and Processes 51](#_bookmark29)

[Checklists 52](#checklists)

[Flowcharts 54](#step-4)

[Appendices 63](#appendices)

[Appendix 1: The Open Compliance Program
64](#appendix-1-the-open-compliance-program)

[Appendix 2: Compliance Standards
68](#template-for-an-approval-request-form-for-the-use-of-free-and-open-source-software)

[Appendix 3: Professional Networks 69](#_bookmark37)

[Appendix 4: Tools & Infrastraucture
70](#appendix-4-tools-and-infrastructure)

[]{#_bookmark0 .anchor}CHAPTER 1:

# Approach

## "In theory there is no difference between theory and practice. In practice there is."

YOGI BERRA

## Context

Compliance engineering consists of a good approach, a good toolbox,
and a good process. First things first: What are our goals in
compliance engineering?

This book focuses on GPL Compliance Engineering. The GPL is a
copyright license with terms that trigger when we distribute the code.
The most famous and widely used version of the license is the GPL
Version 2 (GPLv2). Software such as the Linux kernel or many
commonly-used versions of GNU userland tools fall under this license.
There are other licenses, such as the Library or Lesser GPL (LGPL) or
Affero GPL (AGPL), which are regarded as being in the same "family"
but which have different terms. We address key aspects of the LGPL in
Flowchart #52 later in this text, but we do not specifically address
the terms of the AGPL in this book.

The focus in this book will be on GPL Version 2. This is formally
referred to as the GPLv2. However, throughout this book we will refer
to it as the GPL to keep things simple. This means that unless
explicitly stated otherwise, we mean "GPL Version 2" when we say
"GPL." You can review this license and all the other GPL family
licenses on the Free Software Foundation website.3

GPL compliance engineers are concerned about software products that
are electronically or physically distributed. Sometimes this means
scanning source code to confirm it has the expected licensing.
Sometimes this means scanning binary code or cross-checking binary
code with source code to confirm that they match. In practice, most
compliance work is focused on physical products sent to market or
firmware downloads.

2.  [See page 62](#_bookmark33)

3.  See
    [**https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html**](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html)

[]{#_bookmark2 .anchor}This book explains the process of confirming
whether the binary code on a physical device contains GPL code and
then taking action to ensure compliance if it does.

## Compliance Requirements

The GPLv2 (hereafter the GPL) has a couple of important requirements.
One is ensuring that a copy of the license is provided along with the
distributed binary or source code. The other is providing access to
source code when distributing binary code either as a stand-alone
software application or as part of a physical product.

The GPL describes two ways to comply with the source code access
requirement:

1.  Accompany a product with the "complete and corresponding source
    code" (section 3a)

2.  Include a written offer to supply the "complete and corresponding
    source code" (section 3b)

These two methods differ in **how** the source code is delivered
(either with the binary code or later if requested), but they do not
differ in **what** needs to be delivered: complete and corresponding
source code.

## Compliance Goals

Now that we understand the GPL compliance requirements, we can
understand our overarching compliance goals:

1.  Make sure a copy of the license accompanies the distributed binary
    or source code .

2.  Make sure that the "complete and corresponding" source code is
    available.

#### Copy of the License

When you distribute GPL code as binary or source code, you need to
ensure it is accompanied by a copy of the GPL license. This is the
easiest and quickest part of any GPL compliance engineering process.

You can include a copy of the GPL license as physical or digital media
along with a product. Some examples are:

-   Smart televisions that come with a copy of the GPL physically
    printed at the back of the instruction manual along with other legal
    notices.

-   Smartphones that come with a copy of the GPL under the Settings \
    Legal menu or similar location.

The important objective is to ensure that the license is easily
discoverable by an interested party.

#### "Complete and Corresponding" Source Code

This is a challenging part of GPL compliance and the situation that
the majority of this book helps to explore, explain, and solve. As
mentioned above, our focus is primarily on physical products
distributed with GPL software contained inside, because this is the
most common and most problematic use case for compliance engineers.
Typical examples include firmware flashed onto a device or firmware
updates downloadable from a website.

##### Two Key Considerations

There are two primary checks you need to focus on to ensure
compliance:

1.  The source code does not contain any license violations.

2.  The source code is "complete and corresponding" for the binary code
    distributed.

##### The Ideal Situation

In an ideal world, there is a binary package or a collection of binary
packages, such as a firmware and a corresponding source code archive.
The corresponding source code archive contains only open source
components and perhaps some object files to relink binaries that
contain Library or Lessor GPL (LGPL) software, along with instructions
for rebuilding the binary or firmware. After performing the rebuild,
the original binary file is an exact match to the rebuilt binary file.

##### The Reality

Source code is often not "complete and corresponding." When you
rebuild a binary, you may find different file sizes or even completely
different versions or types of binary code compared to the expected
original. This is the first major challenge we face when seeking to
ensure GPL compliance.

Another challenge comes as a consequence of the above. The source code
for a device often contains license violations that are unrelated to
the binary code it is meant to support. For example, source code
archives sometimes contain prebuilt binaries that have no relevance to
being "complete and corresponding," and instead serve only to put a
company out of compliance when it makes source code available in good
faith.

This is where the bulk of GPL compliance engineering takes place.
Compliance engineers live on the intersection between source code and
binary code. Our challenge is to ensure that a physical product ships
with the expected code, with a copy of the correct licenses, and with
the "complete and corresponding" source code or a written offer to
provide that "complete and corresponding" source code on demand.

## Toolbox

Now that our challenge is clear, it is time to talk about the type of
tools we need to get things done. This discussion is not intended to
be exhaustive, but rather to provide a starting point. If you have
access to the tools we talk about below, you can do everything
contained in this guide. In turn, that will allow you to address the
vast majority of GPL compliance engineering challenges out there.

#### Default Tools

The primary tool for any open source compliance engineer is Linux.
This means that every active engineer needs to download, install, and
set up a standard Linux distribution such as Fedora, CentOS, openSUSE,
Debian, or Ubuntu. They all come with default tools pre-installed that
act as the backbone of our work. Examples include *file, readelf,
find, xargs, grep, dd,* and *modinfo.*

Here are free installations you can get, and where you can get them:

-   Fedora: [**https://getfedora.org/**](https://getfedora.org/)

-   openSUSE: [**http://opensuse.org/**](http://opensuse.org/)

-   Debian: [**https://www.debian.org/**](https://www.debian.org/)

-   Ubuntu: [**https://www.ubuntu.com/**](https://www.ubuntu.com/)

-   CentOS: [**https://www.centos.org/**](https://www.centos.org/)

Armijn Hemel's default installation for compliance engineering is
Fedora. However, the choice of distribution matters less than the
engineer being comfortable with that choice.

#### Binary Analysis

There are some specialized tools to help with analysis of binaries.

We mainly use the Binary Analysis Tool (BAT), but you have options,
and can select the one you're most comfortable using.

##### The Binary Analysis Tool (BAT)

The Binary Analysis Tool makes it easy to look inside binary code,
find compliance issues, and reduce uncertainty when deploying Free and
Open Source Software. It is a modular framework that assists
compliance and due diligence activities by using the same type of
approach applied by copyright holders to discover issues in consumer
electronics. BAT can open more than 30 types of compressed files, file
systems, and media files; search for Linux kernel and BusyBox issues;
identify dynamically linked libraries; and scan arbitrary ELF, Android
Dalvik, and Java class files using a database with information
extracted from source code to find out what software is inside. BAT is
available for free under the Apache license so that everyone can use,
study, share, and improve it.

-   BAT direct download:
    **[https://github.com/](https://github.com/armijnhemel/binaryanalysis)
    [armijnhemel/binaryanalysis](https://github.com/armijnhemel/binaryanalysis)**

-   BAT user guide:
    **[https://github.com/armijnhemel/](https://github.com/armijnhemel/binaryanalysis/blob/master/doc/bat-manual.pdf)
    [binaryanalysis/blob/master/doc/bat-manual.pdf](https://github.com/armijnhemel/binaryanalysis/blob/master/doc/bat-manual.pdf)**

##### binwalk

Another tool for analysing firmware is binwalk --- an easy to use tool
for analyzing, reverse engineering, and extracting firmware images.

-   binwalk download:
    [**https://github.com/devttys0/binwalk**](https://github.com/devttys0/binwalk)

-   binwalk user guide:
    **[https://github.com/devttys0/](https://github.com/devttys0/binwalk/wiki)
    [binwalk/wiki](https://github.com/devttys0/binwalk/wiki)**

#### Source Code Analysis

Our focus is on how to address binary code and the distribution of
physical devices. This does not mean that tools to address

[]{#_bookmark4 .anchor}source code are unavailable. Indeed, every good
compliance engineer has at least one such tool on hand to assist with
confirming that source code licenses are what they expect. The best
place to get started is usually with FOSSology, a free license scanner
that examines source code archives and lets you know what licenses
they appear to be under.

##### FOSSology

FOSSology
([**https://www.fossology.org**](https://www.fossology.org/)) is both
a compliance software system and a toolkit. As a toolkit, it allows
you to run license, copyright, and export control scans from the
command line. As a system, it provides a database and web UI to give
you a compliance workflow. With one click, you can generate an SPDX
file or a README with the copyright notices from your software.
FOSSology deduplication means that you can scan an entire distro,
submit a new version, and only the changed files will get rescanned.
This can be a huge timesaving tool for large projects.

-   Learn more about the project here:

[**https://www.fossology.org**](https://www.fossology.org/)

-   Find a simple 'Get Started' guide to FOSSology here:

[**https://www.fossology.org/get-started**](https://www.fossology.org/get-started)

## Analysis of Binary Files

#### A Word about Binaries

In this book, the word "binary" can mean different things. Sometimes
it means a single executable, sometimes it means an object file,
sometimes it means an archive of binaries, sometimes a firmware; other
times it means an unknown blob of data.

Here is what these different types of binary uses all have in common:

1.  They are not source code.

2.  They could be built from open source code.

3.  They should be analysed.

#### Tools for Analyzing Binaries

##### General Approach

Analysis of a binary can be performed using a number of methods and
tools. It is generally recommended to use the Binary Analysis Tool4 or
*binwalk*5 where possible, to quickly and simply look inside binary
code without reverse analysis. You can also manually dissect a binary
file, blob, or package such as firmware, but this tends to take more
time, and provides little advantage in exchange for the increased
complexity.

##### Limitations

Not every binary can be unpacked for analysis. For example, firmware
might have been obfuscated through file system modifications, or it
may have been encrypted. Sometimes it is possible to identify the file
system modifications or to reverse the encryption, but in other cases,
it is impossible.

##### Advanced Methods

Advanced methods of getting around obfuscation include grabbing code
from a "live" or running device through soldering connections or
breaking into it over a network. These techniques are out of scope of
this book. In the real world, most of the time, you will not face
these challenges.

4.  [**http://www.binaryanalysis.org**](http://www.binaryanalysis.org/)

5.  [**https://github.com/devttys0/binwalk**](https://github.com/devttys0/binwalk)

## Source Code Analysis and Rebuild

A source code archive should be inspected to do the following tasks:

1.  Find possibly problematic binaries in source code archives

2.  Perform a rebuild of the source code and comparing it to the
    original binary

3.  Find incorrectly licensed code

#### Finding Possibly Problematic Binaries

Source code archives from chipset manufacturers and ODMs (original
design manufacturer) often contain more than just source code. Inside
these archives you will often find:

-   Object files leftover from a previous build

-   "Out of tree" Linux kernel modules in binary form

-   Libraries/executables such as a root file system from a previous
    build

-   File system images

-   Linux kernel images with initial embedded ramdisks/ initramfs file
    systems

-   Other firmware images

Each of these files will be explored in more detail later.

You can easily find possibly problematic files using the *"find"*
command in combination with the *"file"* and *"xargs"* commands. One
easy way to do this is to run *"file"* for every file and redirect the
output to a result file. You can then inspect this result file at your
convenience. Here is an example command to get you started:

\$ find /path/to/source/code -type f -print0 \| xargs \--null file \
/path/to/result/file

You should search for:

-   ##### ELF files

Pay attention to the architecture. If an unexpected architecture is
shown, such as MIPS, but your deployed device is ARM, then the binary
can probably be removed.

-   ##### PE32 and PE32+ files

These are Windows binaries and usually have no place in a source code
release related to an embedded Linux system. The exception is if they
are related to ActiveX plugins.

-   ##### Linux kernel boot images

If these are present either as a compressed file or as part of a
U-Boot boot image, they can almost always be removed, because they
were almost certainly compiled using a different configuration file.
Including them would lead to potentially introducing licensing
requirements unrelated to the target device. If such images cannot be
removed because they are needed by the build process, it indicates
that the source code is not complete. The shortcut is to search for
"vmlinux," "vmlinuz," or similar files.

-   ##### MacOS X files

Like Windows files, these have no place in a source code release of an
embedded Linux system, except if they are related to software that
would be served to Apple MacOS X machines by the device. The shortcut
to search for is "Mach-O." These files are often present in the
prebuilt toolchain sources from Android as distributed by Google.

##### Object Files

Object files (extension ".o") can frequently be found in source code
releases. They are usually not problematic from a compliance

perspective, because the corresponding source code is typically also
present. However, they make analysis more complex, because they mean
more files to look at. You can address this quickly and cleanly by
checking if the corresponding extension ".c" or ".cc" files are
present and, if so, using "make clean" to remove the object files.

If there is no source code, you may have a compliance challenge. There
are situations where the object files are needed to complete the build
process and should not be removed. One example is object files that
are part of a proprietary program that is statically linked with LGPL
licensed code and which need to be relinked. Another example is when
object files are part of a proprietary program that is statically
linked with GPL licensed code and where compliance may be difficult or
impossible depending on your legal jurisdiction and your legal
counsel's interpretation of the GPL license.

##### "Out of tree" Linux Kernel Modules

Some devices contain components unsupported by the default Linux
kernel. These need extra drivers to function correctly, and such
drivers are often implemented as Linux kernel modules. A few examples
include WiFi drivers, camera drivers, or firewalling modules. These
extensions provide two common challenges:

1.  Many drivers are provided prebuilt by vendors to ease integration
    issues. The license of these drivers should be carefully checked to
    ensure they are compatible with the license of the Linux kernel
    source.

2.  When extra driver source code is available, it may not be integrated
    correctly in the source code tree. Incorrect integration in the
    build system often leads to missing source code in the final
    delivery.

##### Libraries/Executables

There are often library or executable binaries in the source code
tree. This occurs when:

1.  The source code tree was not properly cleaned up after building.
    This often occurs because someone forgot to run "make clean" after
    building binaries from the source code.

2.  The binaries are in a "template" or "skeleton" directory used as the
    blueprint to build a firmware. The directory structure and the
    binaries in the template directory are copied first, and other files
    are added to it during the build.

If these binaries contain any open source licensed code and do not
match the source code prepared for distribution, they should be
removed. A wrong version number, a different configuration, or any
other alteration from the source code could introduce unintended
violations.

The key question when considering this matter is: "Is the source code
'complete and corresponding' to the built binary code and free of any
extra binary or source code elements?"

##### File System Images

Sometimes entire file system images are included in the source code
tree. For example, many Android source code trees contain file system
images called "boot.img" and "system.img." If these contain any open
source software without corresponding source code, this could lead to
unwanted violations. These images can typically be removed without any
problem.

##### Other Firmware Images

There have been instances where complete firmware for devices
unrelated to the device being brought to market have been found in the
source code archive. These often contain different software versions,
packages, and sometimes even architectures to the current device. As
such, these firmware are an unwanted and unnecessary source of license
violations, and can typically be removed without any problem.

#### Performing a Rebuild

The most effective way to see if the source code is complete and
corresponding is to rebuild the software and compare it to the
original (binary) software. If they are identical --- or nearly
identical

-   then it is a good indication the source code is likely correct.

##### Perfect(ish) Rebuilds

In some cases, paths and time stamps are incorporated into a binary
file. This makes it very difficult, if not impossible, to do an exact
rebuild. Therefore, "close enough" means that the only differences
should be in timestamps, filename paths recorded in the binary, and
similar items.

##### Requirements

For a rebuild, it is important to have the following information:

1.  A description of the build environment.

2.  Full build instructions.

##### Goals

A rebuild has two key goals:

1.  Verify that the build works.

2.  Verify the results.

##### Describing the Build Environment

To successfully compare rebuilt binaries with original binaries, the
build environment has to be described as accurately as possible. This
description should include:

-   The name and version of the Linux distribution or operating system
    that needs to be installed (example: Fedora 7, 32 bit, or Ubuntu LTS
    12.04, 64 bit).

-   The name and version of any packages to install if they are not
    installed in a default installation.

-   Any modifications that need to be made to the default system, such
    as:

![](media/image6.png){width="7.305555555555555e-2in"
height="7.305446194225722e-2in"}![](media/image6.png){width="7.305555555555555e-2in"
height="7.305446194225722e-2in"}Symbolic links that need to be
created. Directories that need to be created.

![](media/image6.png){width="7.305555555555555e-2in"
height="7.305446194225722e-2in"}![](media/image6.png){width="7.305555555555555e-2in"
height="7.305446194225722e-2in"}Permissions that need to be changed.6
Files that need to exist.

![](media/image6.png){width="7.305555555555555e-2in"
height="7.305446194225722e-2in"}![](media/image6.png){width="7.305555555555555e-2in"
height="7.305446194225722e-2in"}Specific users that need to be
created. Environment variables that need to be set.7

If the build environment is different from the original, even to the

extent of using a different compiler or different compiler options, it
could have a big impact on the generated code. This in turn makes it a
lot more difficult to compare the binary files to verify whether the
source code appears to be "complete and corresponding" to the original
binary.

##### Supplier/Client Roles

The requirement for accurate re-creation of build environments leads
to a simple dynamic for providing information.

-   If you are a supplier needing to provide build environment
    information to a client, you should be as detailed as possible.

-   If you are a client needing to have build environment information,
    you should ask your supplier to be as detailed as possible.

6.  These include items like executable bits, read/write permission, and
    ownership permissions.

7.  These include PATH, CLASSPATH, and similar.

##### Rebuild Instructions

The build instructions should clearly explain the exact steps taken to
rebuild a binary. This includes:

-   The exact commands needed to rebuild the binary or firmware.

-   The expected results such as, for example, where binaries can be
    found after a rebuild.

In an ideal situation, you could give the instructions to a random
engineer, who would then be able to perform a nearly perfect rebuild
without any problems.

##### Verifying the Instructions

In the real world, you might expect that people doing a rebuild for
enforcement purposes will stop at the first hurdle they encounter. You
should not assume that people can (or want to) fix these issues;
therefore, the rebuild instructions should be complete, tested, and
foolproof.

It is best to perform a rebuild on a clean physical or virtual
machine, using the exact instructions that were provided. This is
because undocumented modifications frequently exist on development
machines such as the one on which the original build was completed. If
possible, task another engineer --- one without extensive knowledge of
the project --- to do the rebuild and to document any problems
encountered. Adjust the instructions as necessary to ensure clarity
and build success.

##### Verifying the Results

After the rebuild, you need to verify the results. Make sure that the
right results are being examined --- nothing cached from a previous
build. Two methods for accomplishing this are:

1.  The checksum of the binaries.

2.  The content of the binaries.

*The Checksum of the Binaries*

A cryptographic checksum or hash can be computed for the contents of
the file. If the file that was rebuilt has the same hash as the
original binary, then the files are identical. The tools for this are
*"md5sum"* for MD5 hashes and *"sha256sum"* for SHA256 hashes. The
following commands will compute the hashes for two binaries and print
the results. If the results are the same except for the path, then the
files are identical:

\$ md5sum /path/to/original/binary /path/to/new/ binary

\$ sha256sum /path/to/original/binary /path/to/ new/binary

It should be noted that it is best to run these commands on the
individual binaries in a firmware (like *"smbd"* or *"iptables"*) and
not on the whole freshly built firmware. This is because the checksums
for firmware might never be the same. Some binaries like BusyBox or
the Linux kernel will return a different checksum every time, because
by default they include timestamps internally.

*The Content of the Binaries*

In many cases, the checksums of an original binary and a rebuilt
binary will not be identical because the paths of source code files
and timestamps are included. These often differ with each build, even
if an environment is carefully set up.

Not to worry. The following steps can be taken to see if a rebuilt
binary is close enough to the original binary:

1.  Check the file size.

2.  Compare the contents of the file.

*Checking the File Size*

The file size of the rebuilt binary should be very close to the
original binary. If there is a big difference, first check if one of
the binaries is "stripped" (no debugging symbols present) and the
other is not stripped. If this is the case, strip the other binary
too, using the "strip" command (this tool should be included in the
toolchain). If the difference is still significant, then the binaries
are likely not the same.

*Comparing the Contents of the File*

The "strings" command can be used to extract human readable strings
from a binary. This can provide a lot of useful information.

The most important point is that the differences between binaries that
were built identically will be very minor. For the most part, you can
expect differences to be constrained to timestamps, filenames, and
directory names.

This means that you can compare the contents of a file with a simple
three-step process:

1.  Rebuild the binary.

2.  Extract contents using "strings."

3.  Compare the results to the original binary.

The following commands will help you extract the contents of the
files:

\$ strings /path/to/old/binary \

/tmp/strings.old

\$ strings /path/to/new/binary \

/tmp/strings.new

\$ diff -u /tmp/strings.old

/tmp/strings.new \| less

If the differences uncovered are limited to timestamps and path names,
then it is almost certain that the two binaries are in fact identical.

#### Finding Incorrectly Licensed Code

Modifications to open source licensed programs may not be licensed
correctly. One classic example is when changes to the Linux kernel
made by a chipset manufacturer either lack license statements or
contain a statement that is not compatible with the GPL.

There have been enforcement cases focused on relicensing Linux kernel
driver code added by chipset manufacturers. The following steps should
be taken to avoid such situations:

1.  Find incorrectly licensed files.

2.  Find out who introduced the incorrectly licensed files.

3.  Find out if the files are actually needed.

4.  Find a version under an acceptable license.

5.  Seek permission to change the licenses.

6.  Rewrite the software.

##### Finding Incorrectly Licensed Files

Using license scanners, it is possible to find out the license of
source code files. There are many license scanners. Some of them are
proprietary (e.g., Black Duck Protex, Palamida, Whitesource,
Protecode, FOSSID, and FOSSA); others are open source (FOSSology,
Scancode). None of the license scanners do a perfect job, because
license scanning is difficult to do correctly, and there are many
source code files that use non-standard license headers, or have no
license text in a header at all.

For code you wrote yourself, there are ways to make license
identification easier for license scanners. One example is to use SPDX
short identifiers. SPDX is a simple, standard way of describing
package contents and has seen adoption across the industry for its
management of licensing descriptions. You can learn more about SPDX at
**https://spdx.org/**.

##### Finding Who Introduced Incorrectly Licensed Files

After discovering incorrectly licensed files, it is important to
understand who introduced them. It usually boils down to one of two
sources:

1.  The upstream project.

2.  The ODM/chipset manufacturer.

If you identify a situation where open source code does not have a
correct license statement, many upstream projects will appreciate
having this pointed out. Fixing the issues at the source provides
better information for everyone. Please note that in the case of the
Linux kernel, there are many files that do not have a correct license
statement. However, existing files have been in the Linux kernel for
many years and are not considered a problem. Your concern is to find
new rather than known files. A method to quickly filter the known
files is described here: **https://lwn.net/Articles/552758**

Sometimes people or companies have a list of "trusted" upstream
projects. They regard all code originating from that project to be
ready for use without further review. What projects will be trusted
and for what reasons is a decision that will differ per person or
organization. An illustrative rule of thumb is that the Linux kernel
obtained directly from kernel.org may be trusted but a random kernel
fork on GitHub may not.

##### Finding Out If Files Are Actually Needed

If the problematic files were not introduced by the upstream project
(whether the upstream project is to be trusted is a separate topic for
discussion) then it might be wise to remove the files. As an example,
if a file for a Microsoft Windows driver is present in the Linux
kernel source code tree, it can be safely removed.

Similarly, if a file is not used in the final binary or during the
build process, it can be safely removed. One way to check is by
removing it from the source code tree and rebuilding the binary again
(after cleaning up build artifacts from previous builds, of course,
and

doing a fully clean build). If the resulting binary is identical (or
"close enough"), then the file can safely be removed.

**Finding a Version of a Driver Under an Acceptable License** In the
embedded Linux industry, many mistakes have been made in the past
regarding incorrectly licensed source code files, particularly for
drivers. Some vendors have already relicensed newer versions of the
driver under acceptable licenses. However, ODMs frequently still ship
old driver versions, either because they are unaware of the updates or
because they don't want to test if the new driver works properly with
their components.

##### Seeking Permission to Change the Licenses

Changing a license is usually the most difficult solution, but
sometimes the only option left, apart from rewriting the software. If
a file is used and does not have the correct license, you should ask
the copyright owner to relicense the file. Some copyright owners might
not be willing to, but other manufacturers or developers might not
object (see the previous section).

[]{#_bookmark8 .anchor}CHAPTER 2:

# Common Pitfalls

## "We demand rigidly defined areas of doubt and uncertainty!"

DOUGLAS ADAMS

## Pitfall #1: Toolchain

One component that is essential for doing a rebuild is the toolchain,
which consists of the compiler, assembler/linker/et cetera, and a C
library. For embedded Linux systems, the compiler is almost always GCC
(although LLVM is starting to be used), the assembler/ linker comes
from GNU binutils, and the C library is glibc or uClibc (both LGPL
licensed) or musl (MIT licensed) on "regular" embedded Linux, and
bionic on Android systems (although glibc is frequently used on
Android too for add on programs). Although LLVM and musl are being
used increasingly in embedded systems, they are still the exception.

The toolchain is often found to be not compliant. A common scenario is
that a toolchain with GCC and GNU binutils is provided in binary-only
form, without the source code or the offer for the source code.
Although it is possible to use the provided binary toolchain to
rebuild the binaries, it is not the correct approach. The GCC compiler
and GNU binutils are released under GPL v2 or v3, depending on the
version. Their source code, or a written offer for the source code,
should be included with the binary. When glibc or uClibc is used,
there is an additional reason: Parts of the (prebuilt) toolchain (from
the C library) are sometimes copied from the toolchain into a firmware
image. This means that the sources and configuration to rebuild the C
library need to be provided too (as per the LGPL license conditions).
The quickest way to fulfill the requirements is by having the complete
toolchain sources.

Another consideration is that for embedded Linux, the toolchain is a
necessary component in rebuilding the binary. Embedded Linux devices
use different CPUs than regular PCs. While regular PCs use Intel or
AMD chips based on the x86 or x86-64 architectures, the embedded
devices are often built using ARM, MIPS, or PowerPC chips (although
other architectures can be found too). The binaries

[]{#_bookmark10 .anchor}for these platforms are generated by a
so-called "cross-compiler" that runs on a regular PC but outputs code
for a different platform such as MIPS or ARM. Building a working
cross-compiler is a non-trivial task; without the sources and the
exact description how to rebuild the cross-compiler (either using a
script or the manual instructions), it will be very difficult to
recreate the correct setup to perform a rebuild.

## Pitfall #2: Android and Embedded Devices

Systems that are either running Android or that borrow heavily from
Android, may have a few common pitfalls.

#### Android prebuilt tools

The standard Android software development kit as shipped by Google
comes with a large number of tools that are prebuilt for various
platforms, such as Linux, Darwin, and Microsoft Windows, and even
Linux kernel images for QEMU. Many of these tools are licensed under
GPL or LGPL, such as GCC and binutils, cmake, gdb, and many others.
These files can easily be identified by looking for directories that
contain "prebuilt":

\$ find -d /path/to/android/sdk \| grep prebuilt

These directories often contain a variety of prebuilt tools or even
Linux kernel images that may be without obviously placed corresponding
source code or written offer. Frequently there is a file called
"PREBUILT" in the directory that also contains the binaries. This file
points to source code and sometimes also contains more detailed build
instructions. As an example (from an earlier version of Android, for
the ccache tool):

The objects in this prebuilt directory can be rebuilt using the source
archive

ccache-2.4-android-20070905.tar.gz hosted at
[\<http://android.kernel.org/pub/\.](http://android.kernel.org/pub/)

It should be noted that these particular instructions may not be good
enough to result in GPL compliance for chipset manufacturers, ODMs,
and their downstream recipients, for a number of reasons:

1.  This method does not produce a valid written offer, according to
    GPLv2 section 3b. While they arguably cover the originator of the
    code by the "equivalent access" clause in GPLv2 section 3 (because
    they distribute the source code only online), the instructions do
    not extend to the chipset manufacturers, the ODMs, and their
    downstream recipients.

2.  As of the publication date of this book, it should be noted that one
    commonly referred to location for Android source, called
    android.kernel.org, has been offline since September 2011. This
    means that the relevant source code can no longer be found at this
    particular location, though it may be found at other URLs.

Having these prebuilt components in the source code archive without
the corresponding source code can present a compliance risk.

One solution is to also include the source code for these prebuilt
components. Another solution is to remove the components if they are
not needed to do a rebuild (e.g., in most cases, it makes sense to
remove the binaries for MS Windows and Darwin), or to replace the
prebuilt components, if they are actually needed for the build, with
instructions on how to fetch the prebuilt components from Android's
Git server. You should make sure that the exact same version as the
prebuilt versions is fetched; otherwise the build might fail or it
might be difficult to compare binaries (see "Performing a Rebuild").
It should be noted that for some components, such as the toolchain, it
might

still be necessary to provide sources, in case glibc or uClibc has
been used and shipped on the device or in the firmware.

#### Missing/Incorrect License Files

Android's build system generates a NOTICES.html.gz file that is
displayed by default in the "legal" tab on a phone or tablet. This
file is generated by a script that looks for files that indicate the
license status, called "NOTICE."

For some tools and programs in Android, you may find missing license
identifiers or have used the wrong license text (in case of the Linux
kernel). These omissions were fixed in the most recent versions of
Android (Android 6, possibly later versions of 5), but many older
versions (including several versions of Android 5) do not have these
fixes. Chipset manufacturers and ODMs typically have not applied the
existing fixes because they were not informed by Google. The omission
of these texts has been raised in enforcement cases.

The most common omissions and errors are with:

-   iproute2 --- missing license reference in the NOTICES file

-   iptables --- missing license reference in the NOTICES file

-   Linux kernel --- sometimes wrong version of the license in the
    NOTICES file (Linux kernel 2.6-specific)

Fixing these issues is not hard at all, and patches are readily
available, as described below.

###### *iptables*

The notices and license files for iptables are missing in older
versions of Android. Google fixed the bug in the following Git commit:

**[https://android.googlesource.com/platform/external/](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/external/iptables/%2B/b6da12d1a9020e2819f3c449244801a285659f)
[iptables/+/b6da12d1a9020e2819f3c449244801a285659f81](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/external/iptables/%2B/b6da12d1a9020e2819f3c449244801a285659f)**

###### *iproute2*

The notices and license files for iproute2 are missing in older
versions of Android. Google fixed the bug in the following Git commit:
**[https://android.googlesource.com/platform/external/](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/external/iproute2/%2B/5aa4845c8ef3ea0371955a2ba5f7baf7ed4e2d)
[iproute2/+/5aa4845c8ef3ea0371955a2ba5f7baf7ed4e2df4](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/external/iproute2/%2B/5aa4845c8ef3ea0371955a2ba5f7baf7ed4e2d)**

###### *Linux kernel*

The Linux kernel license file is sometimes wrong, because Google used
the license text of a prebuilt Linux kernel (2.6.x), which has a
slightly different license text than later versions. This was not a
problem for Android versions using the 2.6.x kernel, but when the
Linux kernel moved to 3.x and later 4.x, the license text was not
entirely correct. Google fixed this in late 2015:

**[https://android.googlesource.com/platform/build/+/](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/build/%2B/b463fcde80f5615b3fe6891b8b78c010ec8cd37b)
[b463fcde80f5615b3fe6891b8b78c010ec8cd37b](https://android.googlesource.com/platform/build/%2B/b463fcde80f5615b3fe6891b8b78c010ec8cd37b)**

## Pitfall #3: "Out of tree" Linux Kernel Modules

Many vendors ship Linux kernel modules that add functionality that is
not provided by the standard Linux kernel, or that is not yet present
in the version shipped for the device, such as support for certain
hardware, firewalling modules, new security features, etc. Linux
kernel modules for the 2.6 and later releases have the ".ko"
extension. Kernel modules for the 2.4 and older kernel often have the
extension ".o" (but that could also be used for regular object files).

For these so-called "out of tree" kernel modules, it is important to
find out which license they are under and if there is complete and
corresponding source code.

Linux kernel modules can contain several fields that detail things
such as the author and a description, but also a license field. An

example from Linux kernel 4.5. (file "drivers/clk/clk-pwm.c") looks
like this:

MODULE_AUTHOR("Philipp Zabel

[\<p.zabel@pengutronix.de\");](mailto:p.zabel@pengutronix.de)
MODULE_DESCRIPTION("PWM clock driver"); MODULE_LICENSE("GPL");

These fields are then included in the kernel module binary when

it is built. They can later be extracted from the binary either by
using the "modinfo" tool (preferred) or manually (as recent versions
of "modinfo" no longer support the format for Linux kernel 2.4 or
older). The important fields to look at are the author field and the
license field. The author field usually indicates the copyright
holders of the specific code being reviewed. The license field could
indicate the possible license of a file. This field is quite
important, as certain pieces of functionality in the Linux kernel can
only be used by modules that have explicitly declared that they are
GPL-licensed.

It also happens that kernel modules are distributed in a firmware or
source code archive, but they are not used, because they are never
loaded by the operating system, either because there are no programs
to load them, or because the operating system does not allow it (it
may be a different version or even a completely different
architecture). Finding out if a module is used is outside of the scope
of this book.

#### Extracting License and Author Fields from a Kernel Module

The license field can be extracted from a Linux kernel module using
the modinfo tool:

\$ modinfo -l /path/to/kernel/module

Similarly, the author field can be extracted using:

\$ modinfo -a /path/to/kernel/module

Note: Recent versions of the modinfo program no longer have support
for kernel modules for Linux kernel 2.4.X and earlier (using the ".o"
extension). For those modules, you can use the "strings" command
instead:

\$ strings /path/to/kernel/module \| grep -i license

#### Extracting Version and Architecture Fields from a Kernel Module

Similarly to the license field, the version and architecture
information can easily be retrieved from a Linux kernel module:

\$ modinfo /path/to/kernel/module \| grep \^vermagic

For 2.4.X and earlier, the version can be extracted as follows
(because the modinfo tool on recent Linux distributions no longer can
process modules for 2.4 or earlier):

\$ strings /path/to/kernel/module \| grep kernel\_ version

The architecture can be retrieved using different means, such as the
"file" command:

\$ file /path/to/kernel/module

## Pitfall #4: Rescue Mode/Install Mode Systems

Quite a few embedded Linux devices have a special mode that is used
only for system recovery (rescue mode) or when installing a new
firmware. This is done by booting a different Linux kernel from a
different partition on the flash memory. These rescue partitions are
often not updated when a new firmware is released and are simply
forgotten. However, for compliance, it is very important to have the
complete and corresponding source code for all of the different Linux
systems that are used on a device or while updating a firmware.

These rescue partitions tend to have different contents than other
partitions. It is very common to see that both the rescue partition
and the normal one have a copy of BusyBox, but with a different size
and set of tools integrated. This means that they were built with
different configurations. It is also not uncommon to see that a
different Linux kernel (older version, known to work) has been used,
but that the source code releases have the source code only for the
Linux kernel that is booted in normal operation. There have also been
instances where the C library was different (uClibc in the rescue
partition, glibc in the normal partition, and so on).

It also happens that a separate version of Linux is booted only to
perform the installation of a new firmware, and that version is
embedded in the firmware update itself and is not on the device. Or,
it could be that there are three different instances of Linux involved
in one single firmware update: a temporary Linux booted when
performing the update, a different version when writing a rescue
partition, as well as a third version for the regular partition. It is
important to look at everything that is installed or used at
installation time: The device and the firmware update are both
important.

## Pitfall #5: Bootloader

One overlooked component in compliance engineering is the bootloader.
A few commonly used bootloaders on embedded Linux systems (e.g.,
U-Boot and Redboot) are GPL-licensed. The reason they are overlooked
is because they come preflashed on the boards or chips, and ODMs
frequently do not touch this component at all. Many times the
bootloader is also not included in a firmware update, but the firmware
update overwrites only parts of the flash chip in a device and leaves
the bootloader alone. However, if the bootloader is GPL- licensed,
source code for the bootloader should be delivered as well.

If possible, perform your analysis on the firmware update as shipped
to customers (see "Pitfall #4") as well as on a dump of the flash
contents of the actual device, unless the firmware update is actually
the same as the flash dump.

If the bootloader is not included, it might be necessary to extract
the contents of the bootloader from the device. This is outside of the
scope of this book.

## Pitfall #6: Missing Build System

There are build systems that separate the sources of packages and the
description of how to build them. Some build systems have a directory
called "download" or "dl" that contains the sources, while the
Makefiles, configurations, and patches are in a separate directory.
Some companies will publish the contents of the directory only with
the sources but not the build system.

This is wrong for a few reasons:

1.  Any patches that might have been applied are now not included,
    meaning that the source code is incomplete.

2.  []{#_bookmark14 .anchor}Makefiles and other build scripts often
    contain configuration options (environment variables, compiler
    options, etc.) that influence how a package is built. Without this
    information, the binary cannot be rebuilt successfully, or at least
    not (near-)identically.

## Pitfall #7: Incorrect or Missing BusyBox Configuration Files

An often-encountered problem is that BusyBox cannot be rebuilt in such
a way that it corresponds to the binary or binaries in a firmware. The
BusyBox program is very modular; functionality can be added or removed
by editing a configuration file (usually using a special configuration
program). This configuration file is read during build time and
determines which functionalities (called "applets") will be included
in the BusyBox binary. The configuration file is therefore a very
necessary part of the "complete and corresponding source code," and a
missing or incorrect configuration file for BusyBox has been enforced
many times.

#### Missing BusyBox configuration file

Source code release archives often contain only the source code for
BusyBox, but not the configuration, because the build system is not
included (see Pitfall #6).

An easy check for this is to look for a file called ".config" in the
top-level source code file of the BusyBox source code tree. If it
cannot be found, it might be in a separate directory in the build
system, if present.

#### Incorrect BusyBox configuration file

Another problem encountered at times is that the BusyBox

[]{#_bookmark15 .anchor}configuration file or files are incorrect: The
original binary and the rebuilt binary have different sets of applets.
In many of these cases, the chipset manufacturer or ODM cannot find or
recreate the correct configuration file.

It is possible (with tools contained in the Binary Analysis Tool) to
re-create a BusyBox configuration file that could be used as the basis
of re-creating the real configuration file. However, this solution
should be used only as a last resort.

#### Multiple different BusyBox binaries, one configuration file

Quite often there are multiple BusyBox binaries included in a
firmware, each with a different configuration. A common example is a
rescue system (see Pitfall #4) that contains a minimal version of
BusyBox, with the full system containing a BusyBox instance with much
more functionality. The source code archive should include the
configurations for all Busybox instances that are in use on the
device, but frequently, the configuration for only one of the
instances of BusyBox is present.

## Pitfall #8: Incorrect or Missing Linux Kernel Configuration Files

Very similarly to Pitfall #7, the configuration file for the Linux
kernel is often missing or incorrect.

#### Finding which Linux kernel configuration was used

Finding out what configuration was used to build a Linux kernel binary
is not always trivial, and sometimes a rebuild and comparison (as
described earlier in this book) will be necessary. Sometimes the
kernel configuration will be included in the Linux kernel binary

as a bzip2 compressed file. This happens if the "CONFIG\_ IKCONFIG"
option was enabled during the kernel build. In that case, it is easy
to find the kernel configuration that was actually used (for example,
by unpacking the binary with the Binary Analysis Tool and then looking
for the configuration). If the configuration was not stored in the
Linux kernel image, then your only option to verify whether a kernel
configuration is 100% correct is a rebuild and compare.

#### Missing Linux kernel configuration file

Source code release archives often contain only the source code for
the Linux kernel, but not the configuration. Depending on the setup,
the Linux kernel configuration could be in various locations. One
common location is a file ".config" in the root of the Linux kernel
source tree (generated by the Linux kernel configuration commands like
"make config" or "make menuconfig"). Another location is in the "arch"
subdirectory. By default, the Linux kernel source code tree contains
many configuration files, and vendors tend to put the configurations
there. For example, "arch/arm/ configs/bcm2835_defconfig" contains the
configuration for a particular Broadcom board. Which configuration
file to use is set by the build scripts. A third option is that the
configuration file is kept outside of the Linux kernel archive, with
the build scripts, and is first copied to the Linux kernel source code
tree during the build. If the build system is missing (see Pitfall #6)
and the configuration file is not included in the Linux kernel
archive, then the Linux kernel source code will not be complete and
corresponding.

#### Multiple Linux kernel binaries, one configuration file

Quite often there are multiple Linux kernel binaries included in a
firmware, each with a different configuration. A common example is a
rescue system (see Pitfall #4) which contains a minimal version of the
Linux kernel, with the full system containing a Linux kernel

[]{#_bookmark16 .anchor}instance with much more functionality. The
source code archive, however, may have the configuration for only one
of the two versions (or three, or even more).

#### Incorrect Linux kernel configuration file

It also happens that the Linux kernel configuration file may simply be
not correct and that the appropriate Linux kernel binary cannot be
compiled because functionality has been added or removed in the
configuration.

## Pitfall #9: Not Including the Version Number in Firmware and Source Code Archive Filenames

One very common mistake is that firmwares and corresponding source
code archives often do not have the version name (and the device name)
in the filename, but use a generic name, such as "GPL.zip," for
various devices and versions of source code. This makes it very easy
to make mistakes and deliver the wrong files, which might lead to the
impression that you are out of compliance.

The solution is to use, or demand that suppliers use, a naming
convention that would include:

-   Device name/model number (or multiple, if the files are identical)

-   Firmware revision number

-   Revision level

For example: A device called AB-123 with firmware 1.2.3.4 would have a
firmware filename "FW_AB-123_1.2.3.4.bin" and a source code archive
filename "GPL_AB-123_1.2.3.4-0.bin."

Using naming conventions like these will make it a lot easier to
locate the right files, avoid making mistakes, and spot errors on
download sites.

[]{#_bookmark17 .anchor}CHAPTER 3:

# Scenarios for Releasing Software

## "'Did I do anything wrong today,' he said, 'or has the world always been like this and I've been too wrapped up in myself to notice?'"

DOUGLAS ADAMS

## Scenario #1: Software On A Device/Offline Distribution

Software is distributed onto a device, for example, flashed onto a
device. There are two ways to comply with the license:

1.  Deliver the complete and corresponding source code with the device,
    for example on a CD, DVD, or other medium. In some cases it might
    also be possible to include it on the device itself (given enough
    flash or storage space), but what is important is that the user
    should be able to retrieve the source code as well.

2.  Add a written offer, valid for at least three years (for GPLv2; for
    GPLv3 this period might be longer, depending on how long the device
    is supported), to any third party for the source code.

The benefit of the first method is that there are no further
obligations, as all the necessary information (license texts,
copyright information, and so on) are included in the source code
archive, as long as it is complete and corresponding. The drawback is
that often the source is not complete and corresponding, and it is
difficult to correct any mistakes discovered after creating the CD,
DVD, or image. One situation that often arises is that just before
shipping, a new firmware is flashed onto the device, but the CD/DVD
distributed alongside it contains the GPL source code for a prior
firmware revision. This happens because there was not enough time to
create a new CD/DVD. Issues like this can potentially be addressed
with a good Over- The-Air update process. [See Flowchart #4 on page
61](#_bookmark32) for one high-level example.

With the written offer it is easier to correct any mistakes later on,
but there are a few drawbacks: It is necessary to keep an

[]{#_bookmark19 .anchor}infrastructure to fulfill the written offer
(someone has to be responsible to create a source code CD/DVD and ship
it) and there are also some legal gray areas pertaining to whether or
not license statements and copyright statements should be delivered
with the binary. Not everyone agrees on this, but there are
increasingly more copyright holders who insist on having the copyright
notices from the source code delivered with the binary. As previously
stated, when delivering source code with the product this requirement
has already been fulfilled, but when shipping a written offer, this is
not the case. Extracting copyright notices from source code is
awkward. FOSSology is one tool that can help, but additional checking
may be required.

It might be best to choose shipping the source code with the device,
with an extra optional written offer with information on how to ask
for the source code. This way, it can be argued (if there is an error
with the source code shipped) that the preferred way always has been
the written offer and that the source code was mainly to provide
license texts and copyright statements. If the source code is not
complete and corresponding it might be incorrect, but not materially
incorrect.

Please note that this scenario is independent of how firmware on a
device is updated, which the next scenarios will dig into.

## Scenario #2: Manual Download From Website

When providing a firmware update on a website (independent of how the
compliance for an initial device delivery is done --- see the previous
scenario for that) there are often three possible choices to make:

1.  []{#_bookmark20 .anchor}Provide the source code with the firmware
    update in a single archive. This would fulfill the requirements of
    GPLv2, section 3a.8

2.  Include a written offer, as per GPLv2, section 3b.9

3.  Provide a separate download next to the firmware, which would count
    as "equivalent access."

The same benefits and drawbacks apply as in Scenario #1, although it
is much easier to correct mistakes (in choices 1 and 3) than when
shipping a physical device, as it is easier to change the download.

Keep in mind that when offering source code online for download, there
is always the possibility that a new website will be created later. If
the web team is not aware that source code downloads were a
requirement, a company may fall out of compliance after a new website
is rolled out. It is important to note this download- requirement in
the website change procedures and process.

## Scenario #3: Automatic/Over The Air Updates

For automatic updates and "over the air" (OTA) updates, shipping
source code is almost impossible. This scenario for delivering
binaries was likely not available when the GPLv2 was drafted in 1991.
Automatic updates surgically update a few programs or files, and the
size of the source code delivered to a device would dwarf the size of
the executable (for example, the Linux kernel). Also, on many devices
that can receive OTA updates it would be hard to access the downloaded
source code or do anything with

8.  See
    [**https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html**](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.en.html)

9.  Ibid.

[]{#_bookmark21 .anchor}it. Another problem is that there might simply
not be enough space available on the device, and distribution of the
source code might fail.

For OTA updates, the practical solution is to include a written offer.
Please note that this is independent of how the device was originally
shipped (source code, or written offer).

How and where copyright notices and license texts should be delivered
can be a real challenge, especially if the device does not offer any
way to interact with the user (display, web interface, and so on). If
that is the case it might be best to point the user to a website and
offer the information there instead of on the device (which would be
futile as the user has no access to it) and point out that the license
text is from 1991 and that OTA delivery models were not available
then.

## Scenario #4: Field Engineer Applied Updates

In some cases (for example, industrial automation) it is common that a
firmware update is applied by a field engineer of the manufacturer, or
by a support firm. It is recommended to have the field engineer bring
a CD/DVD with the source code and hand it over after the firmware
update has been completed.

[]{#_bookmark22 .anchor}CHAPTER 4:

# Scenarios for Buying Software

## "Everything starts somewhere, although many physicists disagree."

TERRY PRATCHETT

## Context

When procuring devices or components from a third party to sell as
part of your product, it is important to understand that the company
offering the product in the market is responsible for the license
compliance of the product. Often when a compliance problem arises,
there is a conflict about who is responsible and who should bear the
costs. This can lead to suppliers and downstream OEMs pointing fingers
and blaming the other party. However, in the end, the company
delivering the product to the market will likely be found responsible
for ensuring compliance with the license.

It is also true that *fixing* compliance issues will be more expensive
than *preventing* compliance issues. If the whole supply chain works
together from the start to prevent these issues, costs for fixing
issues can generally be kept low.

That being said, changing how current supply chains work is a
multi-year effort. In this section, we will explore a few solutions
that look into lowering risks for all parties in the supply chain.

## Scenario #1: Supply Chain Solutions For SoC Vendors

In most supply chains, the System on Chip (SoC) vendors have the
biggest impact: They choose or build the software development kit and
build a reference implementation that ODMs subsequently modify. If the
SoC vendors get compliance right, then it is much easier for
downstream recipients to comply with the license as well. Here are a
few solutions that are worth considering:

1.  Pick a standard SDK instead of building your own SDK.

2.  Actively participate in the upstream software projects, and try to
    use as much "vanilla" software as possible.

3.  Have a third party check/audit license compliance.

#### Pick a Standard SDK

It is highly recommended that SoC vendors use a standard SDK instead
of creating their own. From a license compliance perspective, the most
compelling reason for this is that these standard SDKs often have
mechanisms for easier license compliance built directly into the
system. Plus, they have been reviewed by many people already and are
supported by a much larger group of people than an in-house developed
solution would be. Examples of standard SDKs are:

-   OpenWrt (and its offshoot LEDE)

-   Yocto

-   buildroot

-   Android

The additional benefit is that the so-called "scripts to control
compilation and installation" are all available in the SDK.

#### Actively Participate in Upstream Projects

Many people are triggered to complain about license compliance status
if they cannot make things work using standard software. Actively
participating in upstream projects and supporting hardware in
"vanilla" projects has two benefits:

1.  People will be less likely to complain, since they can simply work
    around any issues. Of course, this is not an excuse to not take any
    other measures for license compliance.

2.  People will be more inclined to send a "friendly ping" to point out
    any issues than to complain loudly. Of course, participating

[]{#_bookmark24 .anchor}engineers should know what to answer, and how
to interact with communities at large, and be in sync with other
departments and players (for example, the legal department).

Some organizations are more than willing to help SoC vendors to merge
their code upstream and help them become effective open source
citizens. For the Linux kernel, there is, for example, the Long Term
Support Initiative (LTSI) run by The Linux Foundation. For vendors in
the ARM ecosystem, there is also Linaro.

#### Third Party Audits

It might be useful to let a third party check for any issues in new
SDKs before they are shipped downstream, and to incorporate any
findings into the work process. The OpenChain Project
(**[http://](http://openchainproject.org/)
[openchainproject.org](http://openchainproject.org/)**) is a good
start. Another hands-on, practical approach to consider is the OSADL
License Compliance Audit
([**http://www.osadl.org**](http://www.osadl.org/)).

## Scenario #2: Supply Chain Solutions for ODMs

The Original Design Manufacturers (ODMs) are often in between the
System on Chip (SoC) vendors and the companies that deliver products
into the market. They are also the first point of contact for
companies if something is wrong. As referenced earlier in this book,
the technical choices made by the SoC vendor has one of the biggest
impacts on any open source compliance situation. An ODM can help pick
the right SoC vendor or make sure that any (possible) mistakes from
SoC vendors do not impact them. Examples of actions that an ODM can
take are:

1.  Work with SoC vendors that use standard SDKs or whose chipsets are
    well supported in standard SDKs (such as

[]{#_bookmark25 .anchor}OpenWrt) so the SDK you use is a standard SDK
and not a SoC-specific SDK.

2.  Work with SoC vendors that use a SDK that has been certified by the
    OSADL license compliance audit or similar.

3.  Use contracts to push compliance damages to the SoC vendor.

4.  Actively participate in upstream projects.

5.  Let a third party audit a reference design.

## Scenario #3: Supply Chain Solutions for Others

When procuring devices, there are a few things that can be done to
reduce compliance risk.

First and foremost, you can engage with other open source stakeholders
who are addressing similar challenges. A great place to start is the
OpenChain Project. OpenChain focuses on identifying common best
practices in compliance programs that should be applied across a
supply chain for efficient and effective compliance with open source
licenses. It provides (free of charge) comprehensive specification,
conformance, and curriculum material suitable for small, medium, and
large enterprises. You can learn more at
**[www.openchainproject.or](http://www.openchainproject.org/)g.**

Here are some direct measures you may wish to consider:

1.  Select only ODMs that use a solution from a chipset vendor that uses
    a standard SDK or have replaced the SoC SDK with a standard SDK.

2.  Explicitly ask for use of a certified/audited SDK.

3.  Use contracts to push damages upstream.

4.  Audit a sample before purchasing, or contract a third party to do
    this.

Doing an audit before a purchase is an interesting strategy to see how
much risk a certain device will bring with it. This is, however,
easier said than done. Very few ODMs are prepared to hand out samples;
even when there are firm orders for tens of thousands of devices there
are usually only a few samples (one or two) available for testing.
Before a firm order has been placed, it will be very unlikely that an
ODM will give out samples, fearing that the device will be taken to a
cheaper competitor to be cloned.

One solution to this would be to let a third party do an audit and
send a status report only to the purchaser, who can then use it to
calculate its risk.

[]{#_bookmark26 .anchor}CHAPTER 5:

# Building a FOSS Code Center

## "A common mistake that people make when trying to design something completely foolproof is to underestimate the ingenuity of complete fools."

DOUGLAS ADAMS

## Context

It is common for companies to have a "FOSS code center" or "open
source download center" on their website, where users can download the
(open source) source code for products.

While this delivery system is a great convenience to users, it should
be noted that the GPLv2 license was drafted in a time when broadband
connections were extremely rare, and therefore the focus of the
license is mostly on delivering source code with the product or on a
physical medium like a CD. In 2017, the situation has rapidly changed:
Broadband is widely available (although it should be noted that there
are still many places where broadband is rare, or even non-existent)
and FOSS code centers fulfill all practical needs (namely, access to
source code) for most people.

Although a FOSS code center could fulfill the requirements of the
GPLv2 license in certain cases (like firmware updates, where providing
source code on the same location could then fall under "equivalent
access" from GPLv2, section 3), it should not be seen as a replacement
for the traditional compliance methods, but instead as a convenience
to users.

There are no strict rules when it comes to designing a FOSS code
center, as every website is different. However, there are a few best
practices which are mostly non-technical, that are worth following.

## "FOSS Code Center" as a Requirement

Many companies have a "FOSS code center" on their website. Some of the
companies have added this as an afterthought, and not as a requirement
for the design of the website. And whenever there is a new or updated
website, the designers often are not

[]{#_bookmark28 .anchor}aware of the requirement for a FOSS code
center, and it vanishes, with the company possibly falling out of
compliance.

## Keep Firmware and Source Code Together

Sometimes FOSS code centers are not in the same place as firmware
downloads. It might be useful to keep them together so it is clear
which source code belongs to which firmware. It is recommended to at
least make a reference to the right place in a (separate) FOSS code
center from the firmware download page; otherwise users might not know
where to find the corresponding source code and falsely assume that
there is no source code, which would, of course, cause frustration.

[]{#_bookmark29 .anchor}CHAPTER 6:

# Tracking Tasks and Processes

## "Engineers like to solve problems. If there are no problems handily available, they will create their own problems."

SCOTT ADAMS

## Checklists

A quotation worth bearing in mind with regard to all aspects of
compliance engineering comes from C. Northcote Parkinson:

*"Work expands so as to fill the time available for its completion."*

When used properly, checklists can be a useful way to manage your GPL
compliance tasks in a quick, consistent, and effective manner. When
used incorrectly, they can be too general to cover the work at hand or
become overwhelming catalog requiring endless review. A happy medium
is the goal. What constitutes a happy medium really depends on your
organizational size.

For a small organization, a general compliance checklist could be as
simple as the following:

#### General Compliance Checklist

##### Step #1: Ongoing Compliance Tasks

Discover all FOSS early in the procurement/development cycle. Review
and approve all FOSS packages used.

Verify the information necessary to satisfy FOSS obligations. Review
and approve any outbound contributions to FOSS projects.

##### Step #2: Support Requirements

Ensure adequate compliance staffing and designate clear lines of
responsibility.

Adapt existing business processes to support the FOSS compliance
program.

Make training on the organization's FOSS policy available to everyone.

Track progress of all compliance activities.

This checklist is from the *OpenChain Curriculum slides*,10 which is
based, in turn, on the Linux Foundation Open Compliance Program
*Self-Assessment Compliance Checklist.*11

You might elect to have more specific checklists to address specific
compliance goals. For example, the concept of addressing the "complete
and corresponding" source code for distribution is arguably the first
and most useful area for which to have a specific checklist. One way
of approaching this would be to create an exhaustive list of all the
steps possible and necessary. Another way would be to cover the "core"
of the issue and leave details to trained personnel or sub- checklists
as needed. What follows is an example of the latter.

#### Checklist For Rebuilding Product X

This checklist is part of the check-system for ensuring that "complete
and corresponding" source code is available when distributing products
containing GPL code.

##### Step #1

Is a complete description of the build environment provided?12

##### Step #2

Is a list of rebuild steps provided?

##### Step #3

Has a rebuild been successfully completed on a clean machine?

10. [**https://www.openchainproject.org/curriculum**](https://www.openchainproject.org/curriculum)

11. **[https://www.linuxfoundation.org/projects/opencompliance/self-](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/projects/opencompliance/self-assessment-compliance-checklist)
    [assessment-compliance-checklist](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/projects/opencompliance/self-assessment-compliance-checklist)**

12. This should include package versions and any similar information
    critical to ensuring compliance.

##### Step #4

Have the rebuild results been verified?

##### Step #5

Have any uncertainties been escalated to the Open Source support team?

Plenty of options exist for more comprehensive checklists. A great
place to start is the Open Compliance Program Self-Assessment
Compliance Checklist. This comprehensive list, which may be required
for a larger organization, is, like the material above, free of charge
and freely available, so you can explore what is best to meet your
requirements.

## Flowcharts

One great way to approach the challenge of managing your GPL
compliance process is to use flowcharts. Like checklists, flowcharts
can be modest or complex. For various reasons, larger organizations
tend towards weighty versions of both. You do not need to. C.
Northcote Parkinson once again has a quote that is applicable in our
context:

*"Expansion means complexity and complexity decay."*

Bearing this in mind, let us take the first steps towards introducing
simple, clear flowcharts for GPL compliance.

Professionals in open source governance have been sharing suggestions
for various flowcharts for years. For example, this photo shows
Jeremiah Foster of the GENIVI Alliance adding thoughts to a
distribution flowchart at an interactive session led by Armijn Hemel
at the Open Compliance Summit 2015 in Japan.

In this section, we explore some example flowcharts that could support
practical GPL compliance with minimum fuss and complexity.

![](media/image7.jpeg)

To get the ball rolling, we will highlight an older flowchart loosely
based on work by Arnoud Engelfriet from his tenure as the open source
counsel at Royal Philips Electronics. He kindly shared his approach
with Free Software Foundation Europe (FSFE) e.V., a charitable
organization focused on promoting Free Software/Open Source, which
then released a modified version to the world through inclusion in
public presentations.

**Flowchart #0** is a great example of what we need to assist our work
as compliance engineers. It is short, clear, and applicable to
physically distributed devices. It pre-assumes relatively light and
responsive infrastructure to support it:

1.  An "approved" list of open source licenses.

2.  A "rejected" list of open source licenses.

3.  A contact in the legal department to deal with any edge cases.

**Flowchart #0** was released into the public domain in January 2008
via FSFE's legal department --- at that time run by Shane Coughlan ---
with the intention of helping to spread knowledge to companies of all
sizes wondering how best to approach process management around open
source.

After reviewing **Flowchart #0**, you will find a series of
interconnected flowcharts prepared by Armijn Hemel to show a more
detailed process for managing compliance matters. These are not
intended to be a panacea for open source compliance flowcharting, but
they do provide a substantial starting point that can be easily
adopted, adapted, and deployed by organizations of all sizes.

### Flowchart #0: General Approval Flowchart

With thanks to Royal Philips Electronics

### Flowchart #1: How Do I Distribute?

### Flowchart #2: Offline Distribution

### Flowchart #3: Firmware Updates

[]{#_bookmark32 .anchor}Flowchart #4: Over The Air

[]{#_bookmark33 .anchor}Flowchart #5: LGPL Code

# Appendices

## Appendix 1: The Open Compliance Program

#### Other Open Source Compliance Publications

##### Free and Open Source Software Compliance: The Basics You Must Know13

This paper provides basic discussion on the changing business
environment moving to a multi-source development model, the objectives
of compliance, the benefits resulting from having a successful
compliance program, and much more.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### Free and Open Source Software Compliance: Who Does What14

Ever since companies started integrating FOSS in their products, there
has been the need to ensure compliance with applicable FOSS licenses.
Different companies have used various ways to structure their teams
responsible for fulfilling this function. Other companies have opted
for cross-functional teams that include a dedicated Open Source
Compliance Officer who has access to various individuals and teams
that contribute to the compliance effort without being part of a
centralized team. In this paper, we examine the latter model of a FOSS
compliance team and discuss the roles and responsibilities of
individuals and teams involved in the compliance process.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

13. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-](https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-compliance-basics-you-must-know)
    [compliance-basics-you-must-know](https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-compliance-basics-you-must-know)**

14. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-](https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-compliance-who-does-what)
    [compliance-who-does-what](https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-compliance-who-does-what)**

##### Establishing Free and Open Source Software Compliance Programs: Challenges and Solutions15

This white paper focuses on the practical aspects of ensuring free and
open source software (FOSS) compliance in the enterprise.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### Keys to Managing a FOSS Compliance Program16

This paper examines the managerial practices needed to plan,
coordinate, and control a successful compliance program.

Author: Philip Koltun (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### A Five-Step Compliance Process for FOSS Identification and Review17

This white paper focuses on the various practical aspects of ensuring
free and open source software (FOSS) compliance in the enterprise.
This paper provides a sample five-step compliance process for FOSS
identification and review. The paper focuses on using and integrating
FOSS with proprietary and third party source code in a commercial
product.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### Achieving FOSS Compliance in the Enterprise18

This white paper focuses on the various practical aspects of ensuring
free and open source software (FOSS) compliance in

15. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/establishing-free-and-open-](https://www.linux.com/publications/establishing-free-and-open-source-software-compliance-programs-challenges-and-solutions)
    [source-software-compliance-programs-challenges-and-solutions](https://www.linux.com/publications/establishing-free-and-open-source-software-compliance-programs-challenges-and-solutions)**

16. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/keys-managing-foss-compliance-](https://www.linux.com/publications/keys-managing-foss-compliance-program)
    [program](https://www.linux.com/publications/keys-managing-foss-compliance-program)**

17. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/five-step-compliance-process-](https://www.linux.com/publications/five-step-compliance-process-foss-identification-and-review)
    [foss-identification-and-review](https://www.linux.com/publications/five-step-compliance-process-foss-identification-and-review)**

18. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/achieving-foss-compliance-](https://www.linux.com/publications/achieving-foss-compliance-enterprise)
    [enterprise](https://www.linux.com/publications/achieving-foss-compliance-enterprise)**

the enterprise. This paper examines a sample end-to-end compliance
process.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### FOSS Compliance Practices for Supplied Software19

This white paper examines compliance practices necessary when software
supplied by a third party vendor is brought into the code baseline of
a product to be distributed externally. The paper discusses
requirements a company should impose upon its suppliers to disclose
FOSS in their deliverables and to provide what's needed to achieve
compliance. It also discusses steps a company should take to review
and validate the FOSS disclosures made by its suppliers. In addition
to those topics, the white paper addresses measures a company can
undertake to assess its suppliers' compliance capabilities.

Author: Philip Koltun (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

#### Compliance Templates

##### Self-Assessment Checklist

The Linux Foundation has compiled this extensive checklist of
compliance practices found in industry-leading compliance programs.
Companies can use this checklist as a confidential internal tool to
assess their progress in implementing a rigorous compliance process
and to help them prioritize process-improvement efforts. The
Self-Assessment Checklist is constructed using at least two concepts
from well-established models of process maturity, such as the Software
Engineering Institute's Capability Maturity Model:

-   A distinction should be made between process goals and the practices
    implemented to achieve those goals. The

19. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/foss-compliance-practices-](https://www.linux.com/publications/foss-compliance-practices-supplied-software)
    [supplied-software](https://www.linux.com/publications/foss-compliance-practices-supplied-software)**

compliance checklist explicitly recognizes valid alternative practices
that may be used to achieve a particular goal.

-   Process adoption progresses from initial process definition through
    institutionalization to a state of controlled process management.
    The goal of a compliance process, as with any process, is to achieve
    consistent and expected business results from its use. A checklist
    of recommended practices should prompt companies to assess the
    extent to which they've institutionalized compliance actions and to
    which those actions produce needed business results.

Compliance practices included in the checklist will improve the
effectiveness of compliance programs as well as deliver tangible
benefits relative to the cost of those practices. A process failure
modes effects analysis (FMEA) approach has been used to identify the
ways in which a compliance process can fail and practices to prevent
those process failures.

Author: The Linux Foundation

##### Generic FOSS Policy

Companies using FOSS often create a company-wide policy to ensure that
all staff is informed of how to use FOSS (especially in products), to
maximize the impact and benefit of using FOSS, and to ensure that any
technical, legal, or business risks resulting from that usage are
properly mitigated. This document is a new free resource available
from the Linux Foundation under the Open Compliance Program. It offers
a generic FOSS policy that companies can use as starting point in
creating their own FOSS policy. It provides a template policy that
focuses on governing FOSS usage in externally distributed products and
that can be customized to the company's specific needs.

Author: The Linux Foundation

##### Template for an Approval Request Form for the Use of Free and Open Source Software

This document is one of the free resources made available by The Linux
Foundation Open Compliance Program. It offers a template for the
Approval Request Form used by developers to request approval to use
Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) in a commercial product. The
company's Open Source Review Board (OSRB) then reviews the submission
and determines approval. In most cases, the submission, review, and
approval of such requests is managed via an online submission system
that is part of the company's FOSS compliance management process.

Author: The Linux Foundation

## Appendix 2: Compliance Standards

Education and training build a base of knowledgeable resources to
guide your open source journey. However, these tools alone will not
solve efficiency issues if everyone implements compliance processes
differently. The Linux Foundation projects enable the industry to
develop compliance standards for companies and entire supply chains to
exchange compliance data in a consistent way.

-   OpenChain identifies common best practices in open source compliance
    that should be applied as a standard across a supply chain.20

-   SPDX Specifications enable projects and organizations to communicate
    accurate summaries of the licensing and copyright information in
    software deliverables.21

-   SPDX License List is a curated list of commonly found licenses that
    can be referenced by the use of a standardized

20. [**https://www.openchainproject.org**](https://www.openchainproject.org/)

21. [**https://spdx.org/specifications**](https://spdx.org/specifications)

[]{#_bookmark37 .anchor}short identifier per license. For each short
identifier, the list contains the full name for each license, vetted
license text, other basic information, and a canonical permanent URL
for each license and exception.22

-   SPDX Meta Tags enable the use of the standardized short identifier
    in source code to efficiently refer to a license without having to
    redundantly reproduce the full license.23

## Appendix 3: Professional Networks

You're not alone in your open source compliance journey. Many of our
members have found it beneficial to participate in the projects we
host, simply to access the network of experts participating in the
projects. In addition, The Linux Foundation hosts professional
networks to help compliance professionals find each other and
collaborate on ways to improve compliance practices, tooling, and
processes.

-   TODO Group24

-   Compliance Directory25

-   OpenChain26

22. [**https://spdx.org/license-list**](https://spdx.org/license-list)

23. [**http://wiki.spdx.org/view/Technical_Team/SPDX_Meta_Tags**](http://wiki.spdx.org/view/Technical_Team/SPDX_Meta_Tags)

24. [**http://todogroup.org/**](http://todogroup.org/)

25. **[https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org/references/open-compliance-](https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org/references/open-compliance-directory)
    [directory](https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org/references/open-compliance-directory)**

26. [**https://www.openchainproject.org**](https://www.openchainproject.org/)

## Appendix 4: Tools and Infrastructure

To achieve higher levels of scale and reduce the overhead costs of
compliance, companies have contributed to creating open source tools
and infrastructure to achieve compliance at a lower cost, increasing
not only cross-organization efficiency but also integration of
compliance with product development.

-   **FOSSology** scans codebases, identifies licenses in use, creates
    machine readable license lists, and enables automatic notice-file
    creation.27

-   **FOSS Bar Code Tracker** simplifies the way FOSS components are
    tracked and reported in commercial products. The tool allows
    companies to easily generate custom QR codes for each product
    containing FOSS. The QR codes contain important information about
    the FOSS stack contained in a product, such as component names,
    version numbers, license information, and links to download the
    source code, among other details.28

-   **SPDX Tools** are tools for validating, transforming, reading, and
    writing SPDX format files. SPDX Tools also provides links to
    community-maintained and commercially available tools that support
    SPDX.29

-   **Dependency Checker** is capable of identifying code combinations
    at the dynamic and static link level. The tool also offers a license
    policy framework that enables FOSS compliance officers to define
    combinations of licenses and linkage methods that are to be flagged
    if found as a result of running the tool.30

27. [**https://www.fossology.org/**](https://www.fossology.org/)

28. [**http://git.linuxfoundation.org/?p=foss-barcode.git;a=summary**](http://git.linuxfoundation.org/?p=foss-barcode.git%3Ba%3Dsummary)

29. [**http://spdx.org/tools**](http://spdx.org/tools)

30. [**http://git.linuxfoundation.org/dep-checker.git**](http://git.linuxfoundation.org/dep-checker.git)

    -   **The Code Janitor** provides linguistic review capabilities to
        make sure developers did not leave comments in the source
        code.31

31. [**http://git.linuxfoundation.org/janitor.git**](http://git.linuxfoundation.org/janitor.git)

# "So long, and thanks for all the fish."

DOUGLAS ADAMS

![](media/image8.png)**Practical GPL Compliance** is a guide for
startups, small businesses, and engineers tasked with shipping
products that contain GNU General Public License Version 2 (GPLv2)
code. It is directly applicable to consumer electronics, drones, IoT,
or automotive devices based on generic Linux or Android code- bases.
It provides simple instructions, checklists, and flowcharts that
empower compliance teams to work with open source as efficiently as
possible.

The goal of this guide is to demystify GPL Compliance Engineering and
to make it possible for every stakeholder in open source to quickly
address common issues. The focus is on solving real world challenges
in a manner that lays the foundation for addressing open source
compliance more broadly in organizations of all sizes.

\"Today it takes more than simple legal advice to be compliant with
the requirements of open source licenses. This guide is based on the
long-term experience of the authors and represents a unique collection
of practical information about how to solve the technical challenges
compliance engineers are facing.\"

-   Dr. Till Jaeger, Partner at JBB RechtsanwÃ¤lte

\"Shane Coughlan and Armijn Hemel have created a wonderful resource
for anyone working with open source software being shipped in a
device. They describe in detail how to ensure compliance with the
various software licenses and communities in which we all rely on.\"

-   Greg Kroah-Hartman, Linux Kernel Maintainer and Fellow at The Linux
    Foundation

\"Armijn Hemel is the world\'s foremost expert on the technical
aspects of GPL compliance. This book is an indispensable starting
point for all compliance engineers.\"

-   Professor Eben Moglen, President and Executive Director at Software
    Freedom Law Center

"A practical guide with hands-on advice that condenses the significant
experience of pioneers in GPL compliance who actually made some of the
tools of the trade. Given their longstanding and recognized experience
in compliance this is one of the most keenly awaited texts by
compliance advisors and in-house officers. I am glad we now have it
and that it exceeds my high expectations."

-   Carlo Piana, Founder at Array Law and General Counsel at Free
    Software Foundation Europe e.V.
