
Introduction
============

![](media/image25.png)

Open source software (OSS) has been shifting the software industry
into a new paradigm, moving from developing propri- etary code behind
closed doors to developing code that parties can share, modify, and
redistribute openly. The key benefits

of this shift include reducing development costs and software
component complexity, developing reusable, common, off-the- shelf
software assets, increasing flexibility, and benefiting from the
innovation multiplier factor of community-driven development projects.
Organizations that embrace the open source model as

a positive means of building software will increase their chances of
retaining their competitive advantage. Figure 1 illustrates the

various strategic advantages that OSS offers to organizations adopting
it and contributing to it.

During the previous two decades, organizations have realized the
benefits of using and contributing to open source projects in their
products and services. This has created a trend of organiza-

tions setting up Open Source Program Offices (OSPOs) to manage all
aspects of OSS, including the use of and compliance with OSS licenses,
contribution to OSS projects, and community-building around key OSS
technologies.

**FIGURE 2**

#### **Enterprise open source ladder**

**CONTRIBUTOR**

**PARTICIPANT**

**CONSUMER**

**FIGURE 3**

**LEADER**

Figure 2 illustrates four primary OSS enterprise strategies:
consumption of OSS, participa- tion, contribution, and leadership.
Each strategy requires an enterprise to succeed at the previous
strategy, and how far an organization advances depends entirely on the
enter- prise. Engineering drives the early strategies of consumption
and participation. Engineers use

various open source components for their technical merits to speed up
development, but they participate little in the projects that maintain
these components. Over time, higher levels of the organization learn
about the value of this OSS usage. As OSS gains traction, business
needs begin to drive such OSS involvement, and OSS efforts contribute
to a determined business strategy. Some companies achieve their goals
as consumers. Other companies see strategic advantages in other stages
of involvement and in most cases they set up an OSPO to oversee
strategic planning and execution through these stages.

As part of the third stage---contributing to open
source---organizations often choose to contribute key proprietary
technologies to open source with various motivations, such as the
following:

-   Providing a reference implementation to a standard

-   Ensuring that critical software remains viable

#### **Steps involved in the process of open-sourcing**

**Ongoing Support**

-   Undercutting the competition

-   Commoditizing a market

-   Partnering with others and promoting goodwill in the developer
    community

![](media/image23.png)

**Project Launch**

**Infrastructure**

**Governance**

**Partners**

**Initial Investigations**

**Funding**

**Legal**

**Branding**

-   Driving market demand by building an ecosystem

-   Offering customers the ability to support themselves and add custom
    features

Open sourcing with the wrong motivation will often have a negative
effect on achieving the desired outcome and can disrupt the relation
of the enterprise with the communities of specific open source
projects.

This paper identifies questions to ask, practices to consider, and
steps to take when making a proprietary technology open source. Figure
3 illustrates the various steps involved in the process of open
sourcing internal code and launching it as an open source project.
These

![](media/image24.png){width="0.4586165791776028in"
height="8.522747156605424e-2in"}steps are not necessarily executed in
a linear order and several of them can be taking place in parallel.
Our goal with this paper is to provide a basic template that
organizations can adjust to accommodate their own policies and
strategies.

