
Project funding
===============

Once you have made the business case for open source, you'll need a
project plan and time-phased budget covering the costs to launch and
maintain the project over time. Some of the costs are one-time and
others are recurring. Examples of such costs include the following:

-   Internal legal efforts leading to posting the code publicly

-   Ongoing IT project infrastructure and cloud credits (when
    applicable)

<!-- -->

-   Trademark management

-   Creative and branding (logo, website, signage at events, etc.)

-   Project management

-   Regularly scheduled open source license compliance and security
    scans

-   Community events and hackathons

Legal considerations
====================

On the legal side, there are five major activities that need to be
executed. These include:

1.  Confirming ownership of all the source code intended for open source

2.  Conducting intellectual property review

3.  Choosing an open source license

4.  Applying the license terms to the code and updating the license
    information in the source code

5.  Cleaning up the source code before posting it in public

In the following subsections, we cover these various activities and
provide recommendations where applicable.

 Confirm ownership of all the code
---------------------------------

One of the risks in open sourcing proprietary technology is the acci-
dental inclusion of third-party proprietary code as part of the open
sourced code. Before releasing any code under an open source license,
it is highly recommended that an organization holds all the rights and
permissions necessary to open source the code.

Some of the steps in this exercise include the following:

-   Auditing the source code with a software composition analysis (SCA)
    tool1

-   Identifying third-party source code---open source or commercial

-   Determining whether you have the right to open source any found
    third-party commercial code under an open source license; if the
    answer is no, you cannot open source some third-party code, then you
    need to provide alternate code

Conduct intellectual property review
------------------------------------

Software likely subject to patent or other intellectual property
claims is not an ideal candidate for open source release. Here are
questions to ask to help you with this exercise:

-   Does the code disclose or realize any inventions the company plans
    to protect through patents?

° If the answer is yes, then you need to decide whether to remove the
code, establish an IP policy, or make a nonassertion pledge. In all
cases, your legal counsel will make the appropriate recommendations
for next steps when such a scenario arises.

-   Will the source code release trigger patent claims against the
    open-source software?

° If the answer is yes, then you have to remove and replace the
protected code or seek appropriate licenses or permissions.

-   Does the name you chose for the open source project (assuming you're
    starting a new project) protectable under trademark law? Does the
    name or any trademarks

associated with or registered to the project present any risk of
infringement claims?

Choose the open source license
------------------------------

The license of an open source project determines the rights to use,
copy, modify, and distribute the code. The choice of license for an
open source project is an essential factor in determining the openness
of the project. Open source projects should only use licenses that the
[[Open Source Initiative]{.underline}](https://opensource.org/) has
approved. Such licenses allow software to be freely used, modified,
and shared. To be approved by the Open Source Initiative, a license
must go

through its [[license review
process]{.underline}](https://opensource.org/approval) to confirm that
the license satisfies its [[Open Source
Definition]{.underline}](https://opensource.org/osd) (OSD). You may
come across many other licenses that are incompatible with the OSD.
Most of these licenses are "Source Available" licenses that commonly

include restrictions or limitations on the use and/or distribution of
the software. These restrictions often render the licenses incom-
patible with the OSD.

It is always recommended to adopt an OSI-approved open source license.
The choice of the specific license depends on the specific goals you
want to achieve as an organization. We preview in this section some of
the questions that will drive a discussion on this topic and help you
make a decision on the license to adopt.

-   Do you want to relinquish control over how others use and distribute
    the code?

-   Do you want to allow others to use the code in commercial programs
    and products?

-   If others use the code in their program and sell it for money, do
    you want a percentage of those revenues?

-   If others use and distribute the code and improve it (e.g., fix bugs
    or add features), do you want them to contribute those improvements
    back to the project?

What licenses will you accept for contributed code?

-   Will you require a Developer Certificate of Origin (DCO) or a
    Contributor License Agreement (CLA) as a contribution requirement?

There may be additional questions to consider as part of this
exercise, which is mainly driven by your legal counsel and tech-
nology leaders within your organization.

##### DCO

The DCO sign-off process ensures that every single line of code
accepted into a project has a clear audit trail. It is a developer's
certification that they have the right to submit code for inclu- sion
into the project. The Linux kernel process, for instance, requires all
contributors to sign off their code, which indicates that the
contributor certifies the code, as outlined in the
[[DCO]{.underline}](https://developercertificate.org/). The signature
communicates that the contributor has created or received the
contribution under an appropriate open source license that
incorporates it into the project's codebase under the license
indicated in the file. The DCO establishes a chain

of people who take responsibility for the licensing and prove- nance
of contributions to the project.

##### CLA

Some projects require either developers or their employers to sign a
CLA. Unlike the DCO, the text of CLAs can vary signifi- cantly from
project to project, so the terms of any given CLA may have different
effects. The purpose of a CLA is to ensure that the guardian of a
project's outputs has the necessary ownership or grants of rights over
all contributions to allow them to distribute under the chosen
license. In some cases, this even means that the contributor will
grant an irrevocable license, which allows the project to distribute
the contribution as part of the project.

Apply license terms to the code
-------------------------------

Once the source code has been cleaned up following the recom-
mendations provided in a previous step, it is time to apply the
license terms to the code. This exercise includes the following steps:

-   Add license header and copyright notice to every source code file

-   Clearly designate the license on the project's website, any
    frequently asked questions (FAQ) that you provide, and the download
    page if applicable

-   Use SPDX2 License List "short identifiers" in source files

Code clean-up
-------------

Another risk to open sourcing a project is the inclusion of private
information, confidential communications, and trade secrets. To
minimize this risk, you can take the following actions:

-   Remove any exposure of nonpublic application programming interfaces
    (APIs).

-   Remove any comments containing employee names or personally
    identifying information, product code names, road maps, future
    product descriptions, or disparagements.

-   Remove any unused or obsolete code from the source code to increase
    the likelihood of the community's making contributions.

-   Create and include a file that contains the license and copyright
    notices of all third-party software and, if applicable, make the
    source code available.

-   If the source code has dependencies on third-party code, then
    provide the necessary information to the community; it's preferred
    that the code does not have any dependencies on non-open source
    components.

-   Remove any third-party proprietary code.

    -   Add a license file in the root directory of the component
        containing the full license text. For instance, if you are
        posting the code on GitHub, you will provide a **LICENSE.md**
        file containing the full text of the open source license

