Conclusion
==========

There are many ways to successfully open source proprietary
technology. This paper provides a high-level overview of the process
and can be used as a base for a more detailed internal plan. It is
important to acknowledge that this checklist may not be complete and
differs between organizations and projects. The goal is to provide the
most common tasks associated with open sourcing internal projects and
make them available to ease the process. While this process may seem
complex and lengthy, many organizations have

successfully followed similar procedures to bring internal code to
market as an open source project and, in the process, have automated a
lot of tasks and used project management tools to coordinate and track
all tasks.

For more information on creating successful open source projects and
working with open source communities, please visit the Linux
Foundation website for a host of free resources available to help you
with your open source journey.

**Acknowledgments**

The author would like to express his sincere appreciation to his Linux
Foundation colleagues Hilary Carter, Jason H. Perlow, and Melissa
Schmidt for their valuable reviews and feedback. This report has
benefited immensely from their experiences and contributions.

**Linux Foundation resources**

-   E-book: [[A Deep Dive into Open Source Program
    Offices]{.underline}](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/tools/a-deep-dive-into-open-source-program-offices/)

-   E-book: [[Guide to Enterprise Open Source
    ]{.underline}](https://linuxfoundation.org/tools/guide-to-enterprise-open-source/)

-   E-book: [[Open Source Compliance in the
    Enterprise]{.underline}](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/publications/open-source-compliance-enterprise/)

-   E-book: [[Open Source Audits in Merger and
    Acquisition]{.underline}](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/resources/open-source-audits-merger-acquisition-transactions/)
    [[Transactions]{.underline}](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/resources/open-source-audits-merger-acquisition-transactions/)

-   [[Linux Foundation Enterprise
    Guides]{.underline}](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/resources/open-source-guides/)

<!-- -->

-   [[\
    Linux Foundation Open Compliance
    Program]{.underline}](https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org/)---Resources
    to support organizations with open source compliance.

-   [[TODO Group]{.underline}](http://todogroup.org/)---Open community
    of practitioners and organizations that collaborate on best
    practices, tools, and other ways to run successful open source
    programs.

-   [[Software Package Data Exchange®]{.underline}](https://spdx.dev/)
    (SPDX®)

**Feedback**

The author apologizes in advance for any spelling mistakes or possible
errors and is grateful to receive corrections and suggestions for
improvements via
[[ibrahimatlinux.com/contact.html]{.underline}](http://www.ibrahimatlinux.com/contact.html)

**About the author**

![](media/image26.jpeg){width="1.4934995625546807in"
height="1.869430227471566in"}Dr. Ibrahim Haddad is Vice President of
Strategic Programs at the Linux Foundation. He focuses on facilitating
a vendor-neutral environment for advancing the open source AI platform
and empowering generations of open source innovators by providing a
neutral, trusted hub for developers to code, manage, and scale open
source technology projects. Haddad leads the LF AI & Data Foundation
and the PyTorch Foundation. His work and the work of both foundations
support companies, developers, and the open source community in iden-
tifying and contributing to the technological projects that address
industry and technology challenges for the benefit of all
participants.

**Twitter:**
[[\@IbrahimAtLinux]{.underline}](https://twitter.com/ibrahimatlinux)
**Website:** [IbrahimAtLinux.com]{.underline} **Fun project:** [[Tux
NFT Club]{.underline}](https://tuxnft.club/)

**Disclaimer**

This report is provided "as is." The Linux Foundation and its authors,
contributors, and sponsors expressly disclaim any warranties (express,
implied, or otherwise), including implied warranties of
merchantability, non-infringement, fitness for a particular purpose,
or title, related to this report. In no event will The Linux
Foundation and its authors, contributors, and sponsors be liable to
any other party for lost profits or any form of indirect, special,
incidental, or consequential damages of any character from any causes
of action of any kind with respect to this report, whether based on
breach of contract, tort (including negligence), or otherwise, and
whether they have been advised of the possibility of such damage.
Sponsorship of the creation of this report does not constitute an
endorsement of its findings by any of its sponsors.

![](media/image27.png)

![](media/image34.png)

Founded in 2021, Linux Foundation Research explores the growing scale
of open source collaboration, providing insight into emerging
technology trends, best practices, and the global impact of open
source projects. Through leveraging project databases and networks,
and a commitment to best practices in quan- titative and qualitative
methodologies, Linux Foundation Research is creating the go-to library
for open source insights for the benefit of organizations the world
over.

![](media/image38.png){width="1.062587489063867in"
height="0.3717727471566054in"}Copyright © 2022 [[The Linux
Foundation]{.underline}](https://linuxfoundation.org/)

This report is licensed under the [[Creative Commons
Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International Public
License]{.underline}](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0/).

To reference the work, please cite as follows: Ibrahim Haddad,
"Artificial Intelligence and Data in Open Source: Challenges and
Opportunities for Mass Collaboration at Scale," foreword by Dr. Seth
Dobrin, March, 2022.
