
[]{#_bookmark147 .anchor}**CHAPTER 10**

THE LESSER GPL

As we have seen in our consideration of the GPL, its text is
specifically designed to cover all possible derivative, modified
and/or combined works under copyright law. Our goal in designing the
GPL was to maximize its use of the controls of copyright law to
maximize the number of works that were covered by GPL.

However, while the strategic goal of software freedom is to bring as
much Free Software into the world as possible, particular tactical
considerations regarding software freedom dictate different means.
Extending the copyleft effect as far as copyright law allows is not
always the most prudent course in reaching the goal. In particular
situations, even those of us with the goal of building a world where
all published software is Free Software realize that full copyleft
does not best serve us. The GNU Lesser General Public License ("GNU
LGPL") was designed as a solution for such situations. The Lesser
General Public License is sometimes described as a "weak copyleft"
license, because code licensed under LGPL's terms can be combined with
code under non-free licenses, and is sometimes used in that fashion.

## The First LGPL'd Program

The first example that FSF encountered where such altered tactics were
needed was when work began on the GNU C Library. The GNU C Library
would become (and today, now is) a drop-in replacement for existing C
libraries. On a Unix-like operating system, C is the lingua franca and
the C library is an essential component for all programs. It is
extremely difficult to construct a program that will run with ease on
a Unix-like operating system without making use of services provided
by the C library --- even if the program is written in a language
other than C. Effectively, all user application programs that run on
any modern Unix-like system must make use of the C library.

By the time work began on the GNU implementation of the C libraries,
there were already many C libraries in existence from a variety of
vendors. Every proprietary Unix vendor had one, and many third parties
produced smaller versions for special purpose use. However, our goal
was to create a C library that would provide equivalent functionality
to these other C libraries on a Free Software operating system (which
in fact happens today on modern GNU/Linux systems, which all use the
GNU C Library).

Unlike existing GNU application software, however, the licensing
implications of releasing the GNU C Library ("glibc") under the GPL
were somewhat different. Applications released under the GPL would
never themselves become part of proprietary software. However, if
glibc were released under the GPL, it would require that any
application distributed for the GNU/Linux platform be released under
the GPL.

Since all applications on a Unix-like system depend on the C library,
it means that they must link with that library to function on the
system. In other words, all applications running on a Unix-like system
must be combined with the C library to form a new whole work that is
composed of the original application and the C library. Thus, if glibc
were GPL'd, each and every application distributed for use on
GNU/Linux

would also need to be GPL'd, since to even function, such applications
would need to be combined into larger works by linking with glibc.

At first glance, such an outcome seems like a windfall for Free
Software advocates, since it stops all proprietary software
development on GNU/Linux systems. However, the outcome is a bit more
subtle. In a world where many C libraries already exist, many of which
could easily be ported to GNU/Linux, a GPL'd glibc would be unlikely
to succeed. Proprietary vendors would see the excellent opportunity to
license their C libraries to anyone who wished to write proprietary
software for GNU/Linux systems. The de-facto standard for the C
library on GNU/Linux would likely be not glibc, but the most popular
proprietary one.

Meanwhile, the actual goal of releasing glibc under the GPL --- to
ensure no proprietary applications on GNU/Linux --- would be
unattainable in this scenario. Furthermore, users of those proprietary
applications would also be users of a proprietary C library, not the
Free glibc.

The Lesser GPL was initially conceived to handle this scenario. It was
clear that the existence of proprietary applications for GNU/Linux was
inevitable. Since there were so many C libraries already in existence,
a new one under the GPL would not stop that tide. However, if the new
C library were released under a license that permitted proprietary
applications to link with it, but made sure that the library itself
remained Free, an ancillary goal could be met. Users of proprietary
applications, while they would not have the freedom to copy, share,
modify and redistribute the application itself, would have the freedom
to do so with respect to the C library.

There was no way the license of glibc could stop or even slow the
creation of proprietary applications on GNU/Linux. However, loosening
the restrictions on the licensing of glibc ensured that nearly all
proprietary applications at least used a Free C library rather than a
proprietary one. This trade-off is central to the reasoning behind the
LGPL.

Of course, many people who use the LGPL today are not thinking in
these terms. In fact, they are often choosing the LGPL because they
are looking for a "compromise" between the GPL and the X11-style
liberal licensing. However, understanding FSF's reasoning behind the
creation of the LGPL is helpful when studying the license.

## What's the Same?

Much of the text of the LGPL is identical to the GPL. As we begin our
discussion of the LGPL, we will first eliminate the sections that are
identical, or that have the minor modification changing the word
"Program" to "Library."

First, LGPLv2.1 1, the rules for verbatim copying of source, are
equivalent to those in GPLv2 1.

Second, LGPLv2.1 8 is equivalent GPLv2 4. In both licenses, this
section handles termination in precisely the same manner.

LGPLv2.1 9 is equivalent to GPLv2 5. Both sections assert that the
license is a copyright license, and handle the acceptance of those
copyright terms.

LGPLv2.1 10 is equivalent to GPLv2 6. They both protect the
distribution system of Free Software under these licenses, to ensure
that up, down, and throughout the distribution chain, each recipient
of the software receives identical rights under the license and no
other restrictions are imposed.

LGPLv2.1 11 is GPLv2 7. As discussed, it is used to ensure that other
claims and legal realities, such as patent licenses and court
judgments, do not trump the rights and permissions granted by these
licenses, and requires that distribution be halted if such a trump is
known to exist.

LGPLv2.1 12 adds the same features as GPLv2 8. These sections are used
to allow original copyright holders to forbid distribution in
countries with draconian laws that would otherwise contradict these
licenses. LGPLv2.1 13 sets up the FSF as the steward of the LGPL, just
as GPLv2 9 does for GPL. Meanwhile, LGPLv2.1 14 reminds licensees that
copyright holders can grant exceptions to the terms of LGPL, just as

GPLv2 10 reminds licensees of the same thing.

Finally, the assertions of no warranty and limitations of liability
are identical; thus LGPLv2.1 15 and LGPLv2.1 16 are the same as GPLv2
11 and 12.

As we see, the entire latter half of the license is identical. The
parts which set up the legal boundaries and meta-rules for the license
are the same. It is our intent that the two licenses operate under the
same legal mechanisms and are enforced precisely the same way.

We strike a difference only in the early portions of the license.
Namely, in the LGPL we go into deeper detail of granting various
permissions to create certain types of combinations, modifications and
derivations. The LGPL does not stretch the requirements as far as
copyright law does regarding what works must be relicensed under the
same terms. Therefore, LGPL must in detail explain which works can be
proprietary. Thus, we'll see that the front matter of the LGPL is a
bit more wordy and detailed with regards to the permissions granted to
those who modify or redistribute the software.

## Additions to the Preamble

Most of the LGPL's Preamble is identical, but the last seven
paragraphs introduce the concepts and reasoning behind creation of the
license, presenting a more generalized and briefer version of the
story with which we began our consideration of the LGPL.

In short, FSF designed the LGPL for those edge cases where the freedom
of the public can better be served by a more lax licensing system. FSF
doesn't encourage use of the LGPL automatically for any software that
happens to be a library; rather, FSF suggests that it only be used in
specific cases, such as the following:

To encourage the widest possible use of a Free Software library, so it
becomes a de-facto standard over similar, although not
interface-identical, proprietary alternatives

To encourage use of a Free Software library that already has
interface-identical proprietary competitors that are more developed

To allow a greater number of users to get freedom, by encouraging
proprietary companies to pick a Free alternative for its otherwise
proprietary products

The LGPL's preamble sets forth the limits to which the license seeks
to go in chasing these goals. The LGPL is designed to ensure that
users who happen to acquire software linked with such libraries have
full freedoms with respect to that library. They should have the
ability to upgrade to a newer or modified Free version or to make
their own modifications, even if they cannot modify the primary
software program that links to that library.

Finally, the preamble introduces two terms used throughout the license
to clarify between the different types of combined works: "works that
use the library," and "works based on the library." Unlike the GPL,
the LGPL must draw some lines regarding permissibly proprietary
combined works. We do this here in this license because we
specifically seek to liberalize the rights afforded to those who make
combined works. In the GPL, we reach as far as copyright law allows.
In the LGPL, we want to draw a line that allows some derivative works
copyright law would otherwise prohibit if the copyright holder
exercised his full permitted controls over the work.

## An Application: A Work that Uses the Library

In the effort to allow certain proprietary works and prohibit others,
the LGPL distinguishes between two classes of works: "works based on
the library," and "works that use the library." The distinction is
drawn on the bright line of binary (or runtime) combined works and
modified versions of source code. We will first consider the
definition of a "work that uses the library," which is set forth in
LGPLv2.1 5.

We noted in our discussion of GPLv2 3 (discussed in Section
[5.2](#gplv2-3-producing-binaries) of this document) that binary
programs when compiled and linked with GPL'd software are covered as a
whole by GPL. This includes both linking that happens at compile-time
(when the binary is created) or at runtime (when the binary --
including library and main program both -- is loaded into memory by
the user). In GPL, binary works are controlled by the terms of the
license (in GPLv2 3), and distributors of such binary works must
release full corresponding source.

The LGPL, by contrast, allows partial proprietarization of such binary
works. This scenario, defined in LGPL as "a work that uses the
library," works as follows:

-   A new copyright holder creates a separate and independent work, *I*,
    > that makes interface calls (e.g., function calls) to the LGPL'd
    > work, called *L*, whose copyright is held by some other party.
    > Note that since *I* and *L* are separate and independent works,
    > there is no copyright obligation on this new copyright holder with
    > regard to the licensing of *I*, at least with regard to the source
    > code.

-   The new copyright holder, for her software to be useful, realizes
    > that it cannot run without combining *I* and *L*. Specifically,
    > when she creates a running binary program, that running binary
    > must be a combined work, called *L*+*I*, that the user can run.

-   Since *L*+*I* is a based on both *I* and *L*, the license of *L*
    > (the LGPL) can put restrictions on the license of *L*+*I*. In
    > fact, this is what the LGPL does.

We will talk about the specific restrictions LGPLv2.1 places on "works
that use the library" in detail in Section
[10.7.](#lgplv2.1-6-lgplv2.1-5-combining-the-works) For now, focus on
the logic related to how the LGPLv2.1 places requirements on the
license of

\+ . Note, first of all, the similarity between this explanation and
that in Section [5.1.2,](#gplv2-2b) which discussed the combination of
otherwise separate and independent works with GPL'd code. Effectively,
what LGPLv2.1 does is say that when a new work is otherwise separate
and independent, but has interface calls out to an LGPL'd library,
then it is considered a "work that uses the library."

In addition, the only reason that LGPLv2.1 has any control over the
licensing of a "work that uses the library" is for the same reason
that GPL has some say over separate and independent works. Namely,
such controls exist because the *binary combination* ( + ) that must
be created to make the separate work ( ) at all useful is a work based
on the LGPLv2.1'd software ( ).

Thus, a two-question test that will help indicate if a particular work
is a "work that uses the library" under LGPLv2.1 is as follows:

1.  Is the source code of the new copyrighted work, *I*, a completely
    > independent work that stands by itself, and includes no source
    > code from *L*?

2.  When the source code is compiled, does it combine into a single work
    > with *L*, either by static (compile- time) or dynamic (runtime)
    > linking, to create a new binary work, *L*+*I*?

If the answers to both questions are "yes," then is most likely a
"work that uses the library." If the answer to the first question
"yes," but the answer to the second question is "no," then most likely
is neither a "work that uses the library" nor a "work based on the
library." If the answer to the first question is "no," but the answer
to the second question is "yes," then an investigation into whether or
not is in fact a "work based on the library" is warranted.

## The Library, and Works Based On It

In short, a "work based on the library" could be defined as any work
based on the LGPL'd software that cannot otherwise fit the definition
of a "work that uses the library." A "work based on the library"
extends the full width and depth of derivative, combined and/or
modified works under copyright law, in the same sense that the GPL
does.

Most typically, one creates a "work based on the library" by directly
modifying the source of the library. Such a work could also be created
by tightly integrating new software with the library. The lines are no
doubt fuzzy, just as they are with GPL'd works, since copyright law
gives us no litmus test for determining if a given work is a
derivative or otherwise a modified version of another software
program.

Thus, the test to use when considering whether something is a "work
based on the library" is as follows:

1.  Is the new work, when in source form, a derivative and/or modified
    > work of, and/or a combined work with the LGPL'd work under
    > copyright law?

2.  Is there no way in which the new work fits the definition of a "work
    > that uses the library"?

If the answer is "yes" to both these questions, then you most likely
have a "work based on the library." If the answer is "no" to the first
but "yes" to the second, you are in a gray area between "work based on
the library" and a "work that uses the library."

You can also perform a similar same analysis through careful
consideration of the license text itself. LGPLv2 2(a) states that if a
licensed work is a software library (defined in LGPLv2 0 as "a
collection of software functions and/or data prepared so as to be
conveniently linked with application programs (which use some of those
functions and data) to form executables"), you have permission to
distribute modified versions only if those versions are themselves
libraries. LGPLv2.1 code can therefore not be compliantly taken from
its context in a library and placed in a non-library modified version
or work based on the work. For its part, LGPLv2 6 does not provide an
exception for this rule: a combination may be made of a modified
version of an LGPL'd library with other code, but the LGPL'd code must
continue to be structured as a library, and to that library the terms
of the license continue to apply.

Either way you view the rules, these issues are admittedly
complicated. Nevertheless, In our years of work with the LGPLv2.1,
however, we have never seen a work of software that was not clearly
one or the other; the line is quite bright. At times, though, we have
seen cases where a particularly large work in some ways seemed to be
both to both a work that used the library and a work based on the
library. We overcame this problem by dividing the work into smaller
subunits. It was soon discovered that what we actually had were three
distinct components: the original LGPL'd work, a specific set of works
that used that library, and a specific set of works that were based on
the library. Once such distinctions are established, the licensing for
each component can be considered independently and the LGPLv2.1
applied to each work as prescribed. Finally, note though that, since
the LGPLv2.1 can be easily upgraded to GPLv2-or-later, in the worst
case you simply need to comply as if the software was licensed under
GPLv2. The only reason you must consider the question of whether you
have a "work that uses the library" or a "work based on the library"
is when you wish to take advantage of the "weak copyleft" effect of
the Lesser GPL. If GPLv2-or-later is an acceptable license (i.e., if
you plan to copyleft the entire work anyway), you may find this an
easier option.

## Subtleties in Defining the Application

In our discussion of the definition of "works that use the library,"
we left out a few more complex details that relate to lower-level
programming details. The fourth paragraph of LGPLv2.1 5 covers these
complexities, and it has been a source of great confusion. Part of the
confusion comes because a deep understanding of how compiler programs
work is nearly mandatory to grasp the subtle nature of what LGPLv2.1
5, 4 seeks to cover. It helps some to note that this is a border case
that we cover in the license only so that when such a border case is
hit, the implications of using the LGPL continue in the expected way.

To understand this subtle point, we must recall the way that a
compiler operates. The compiler first generates object code, which are
the binary representations of various programming modules. Each of
those modules is usually not useful by itself; it becomes useful to a
user of a full program when those modules are *linked* into a full
binary executable.

As we have discussed, the assembly of modules can happen at
compile-time or at runtime. Legally, there is no distinction between
the two --- both create a modified version of the work by copying and
combining portions of one work and mixing them with another. However,
under LGPL, there is a case in the compilation process where the legal
implications are different. To understand this phenomenon, we consider
that a "work that uses the library" is typically one whose final
binary is a work based on the Program, but whose source is not.
However, sometimes, there are cases where the object code --- that
intermediate step between source and final binary --- is a work
created by copying and modifying code from the LGPL'd software.

For efficiency, when a compiler turns source code into object code, it
sometimes places literal portions of the copyrighted library code into
the object code for an otherwise separate independent work. In the
normal scenario, the final combined work would not be created until
final assembly and linking of the executable occurred. However, when
the compiler does this efficiency optimization, at the intermediate
object code step, a combined work is created.

LGPLv2.1 5 4 is designed to handle this specific case. The intent of
the license is clearly that simply compiling software to "make use" of
the library does not in itself cause the compiled work to be a "work
based on the library." However, since the compiler copies verbatim,
copyrighted portions of the library into

the object code for the otherwise separate and independent work, it
would actually cause that object file to be a "work based on the
library." It is not FSF's intent that a mere compilation idiosyncrasy
would change the requirements on the users of the LGPLv2.1'd software.
This paragraph removes that restriction, allowing the implications of
the license to be the same regardless of the specific mechanisms the
compiler uses underneath to create the "work that uses the library."

As it turns out, we have only once had anyone worry about this
specific idiosyncrasy, because that particular vendor wanted to ship
object code (rather than final binaries) to their customers and was
worried about this edge condition. The intent of clarifying this edge
condition is primarily to quell the worries of software engineers who
understand the level of verbatim code copying that a compiler often
does, and to help them understand that the full implications of
LGPLv2.1 are the same regardless of the details of the compilation
progress.

## LGPLv2.1 §6 & LGPLv2.1 §5: Combining the Works

Now that we have established a good working definition of works that
"use" and works that "are based on" the library, we will consider the
rules for distributing these two different works.

The rules for distributing "works that use the library" are covered in
LGPLv2.1 6. LGPLv2.1 6 is much like GPLv2 3, as it requires the
release of source when a binary version of the LGPL'd software is
released. Of course, it only requires that source code for the library
itself be made available. The work that "uses" the library need not be
provided in source form. However, there are also conditions in
LGPLv2.1 6 to make sure that a user who wishes to modify or update the
library can do so.

LGPLv2.1 6 lists five choices with regard to supplying library source
and granting the freedom to modify that library source to users. We
will first consider the option given by 6(b), which describes the most
common way currently used for LGPLv2.1 compliance on a "work that uses
the library."

LGPLv2.1 6(b) allows the distributor of a "work that uses the library"
to simply use a dynamically linked, shared library mechanism to link
with the library. This is by far the easiest and most straightforward
option for distribution. In this case, the executable of the work that
uses the library will contain only the "stub code" that is put in
place by the shared library mechanism, and at runtime the executable
will combine with the shared version of the library already resident
on the user's computer. If such a mechanism is used, it must allow the
user to upgrade and replace the library with interface-compatible
versions and still be able to use the "work that uses the library."
However, all modern shared library mechanisms function as such, and
thus LGPLv2.1 6(b) is the simplest option, since it does not even
require that the distributor of the "work based on the library" ship
copies of the library itself.

LGPLv2.1 6(a) is the option to use when, for some reason, a shared
library mechanism cannot be used. It requires that the source for the
library be included, in the typical GPL fashion, but it also has a
requirement beyond that. The user must be able to exercise her freedom
to modify the library to its fullest extent, and that means
recombining it with the "work based on the library." If the full
binary is linked without a shared library mechanism, the user must
have available the object code for the "work based on the library," so
that the user can relink the application and build a new binary.

Almost all known LGPL'd distributions exercise either LGPLv2.1 6(a) or
LGPLv2.1 6(b). However, LGPLv2.1 6 provides three other options.
LGPLv2.1 6(c) allows for a written offer for CCS (akin to [GPLv2
3(b)).](#additional-source-provision-options) CCS may also be
distributed by network under the terms of LGPLv2.1 6(c). Furthermore,
under LGPLv2.1 6(e) the distributor may "verify" that the user has
already received, or at least that the distributor has already sent to
this particular user, the relevant source[^1^](#_bookmark155).

Finally, LGPLv3 *§*6 also requires that:

You must give prominent notice with each copy of the work that the
Library is used in it and that the Library and its use are covered by
this License. You must supply a copy of this License. If the work
during execution displays copyright notices, you must include the
copyright notice for the Library among them, as well as a reference
directing the user to the copy of this License.

^1^[]{#_bookmark155 .anchor}Policy motivations for LGPLv2.1 6(d) are
unclear, but it presumably intended to prevent requiring duplicate
deliveries in "whole distribution" situations.

This is not identical to the roughly parallel requirements of GPLv2
and GPLv3. Compliance requires slightly different measures with
respect to the "credits" or "licenses" or "about" screens in
interactive programs.

## Distributing Works Based On the Library

Essentially, "works based on the library" must be distributed under
the same conditions as works under full GPL. In fact, we note that
LGPLv2.1 2 is nearly identical in its terms and requirements to GPLv2
2.

There are, however, subtle differences and additions. For example not
only is CCS required (as would be with normal versions of GPL), but
also the CCS provided must enable a developer to regenerate the
modified version of the entire combined work, using with a modified
version of the LGPL'd work (as a replacement for the version a
distributor provided). For example, LGPL'd code is statically linked
to a non-copyleft executable, the required source code must also
include sufficient material to split the distributed executable and
relink with a modified version of the library.

## And the Rest

The remaining variations between the LGPL and the GPL cover the
following conditions:

Allowing a licensing "upgrade" from the LGPL to the GPL (in LGPLv2.1
3). Note, however, LGPLv2.1 3 allows relicensing of works under its
terms instead under the terms of GPLv2-or-later. This provides, for
example, a pathway for those who do not want to use code under the
requirements of LGPLv2.1 to do so under GPLv2 or GPLv3 at their
discretion.

-   Binary distribution of the library only, covered in LGPLv2.1 *§*4,
    > which is effectively equivalent to LGPLv2.1 *§*3

-   Creating aggregates of libraries that are separate and independent
    > works from each other, and dis- tributing them as a unit (in
    > LGPLv2.1 *§*7)

Due to time constraints, we cannot cover these additional terms in
detail, but they are mostly straight- forward. The key to
understanding LGPLv2.1 is understanding the difference between a "work
based on the library" and a "work that uses the library." Once that
distinction is clear, the remainder of LGPLv2.1 is close enough to GPL
that the concepts discussed in our more extensive GPL unit can be
directly applied.

