
[]{#_bookmark158 .anchor}**CHAPTER 11**

LGPLV3

LGPLv3 was designed to rectify architectural flaws in the GNU family
of licenses. Historically , LGPLv2.1 was a textual modification of
GPLv2. Reconciliation of licensing terms upon combination of
LGPLv2.1'd and GPLv2'd works is cumbersome, from a licensing
bookkeeping perspective.

LGPLv3 redresses this historical problem through extensive use of
[GPLv3](#gplv3-7-additional-permissions) 7's exception architecture.

LGPLv3 is therefore a set of additional permission to GPLv3.

## Section 0: Additional Definitions

LGPLv3 0 defines the "Library" -- a work that presents one or more
interfaces at which a "use" can be made by an "Application." Class
inheritance is "deemed" a use of an interface. An "Application," which
is other program code using one or more "Library" interfaces can be
combined with the code on the other side of the interfaces it uses to
form a "Combined Work."

## LGPLv3 §1: Exception to GPLv3 §3

LGPLv3 *§*1 excepts away the interference with use of LGPLv3 code as
part of "effective technological measures" of access limitation for
other copyrighted works provided otherwise by GPLv3 *§*3.

## LGPLv3 §2: Conveying Modified Versions

LGPLv3 2 continues to require, as LGPLv2.1 2(d) requires, that the
Library not be modified to require keys, tokens, tables, or other
global non-argument data unrelated to function. This is again stated
as a "good faith effort" requirement, but failure to cure on notice is
strong evidence of the absence of good faith. LGPLv3 *§*2(b) permits
removal of the permissions entirely (as prescribed by GPLv3 *§*7);
however, such removal reduces the license of the entire covered work
back to pure GPLv3. Thus, exercising LGPLv3 *§*2(b) as a compliance
alternative to LGPLv3 *§*2(a) likely creates more compliance
obligations than it removes.

## LGPLv3 §3: Object Code Incorporating Material from Li- brary Header Files

LGPLv3 3's front matter assures incorporation of smaller header files
into non-copylefted object code can proceed unimpeded. More complex
header files (those that do not meet the limitations provided in

the section), can still be incorporated into object code, a copy of
appropriate licensing information must accompany distribution (per
LGPLv3 *§*3(a--b).

## LGPLv3 §4: Combined Works

LGPLv3 4 is the combination permission at the heart of LGPLv3. It
restates the license limitation provision of LGPLv2.1 2 to clarify
that the terms on the Combined Work may not prohibit user modification
of the Library code, or the debugging of such modifications to the
Library code by means of whatever reverse engineering is necessary.

LGPLv3 4(d)(0) contains the source provision requirement, for the
Minimal Corresponding Source, which "means the Corresponding Source
for the Combined Work, excluding any source code for portions of the
Combined Work that, considered in isolation, are based on the
Application, and not on the Linked Version \[of the Library\]". The
alternative to the provision of source code is distribution by way of
the "shared library" mechanism under LGPLv3 4(d)(1), described with
respect to LGPLv2.1 6.

In addition, LGPLv3 4(e) requires the delivery of "installation
information" required to install the modified version of the Library
in "user products" under GPLv3 6. Where Library Minimal Corresponding
Source is not made available under LGPLv3 4(d)(1), LGPLv3 4(e)
reaffirms that "installation information" must still be compliantly
delivered under the terms of GPLv3 6.

All other provisions of GPLv3 are in force as previously described,
and are not excepted by the additional permission granted in LGPLv3.

If the distributor of the combined work intends not to distribute or
offer the source code of the LGPL'd components, the LGPL'd work must
be separately distributed (subject to source code delivery
requirements as part of that separate distribution) and packaged in a
"shared library" mechanism, which means that it:

4(d)(1): uses at run time a copy of the library already present on the
user's computer system, rather than copying library functions into the
executable, and

4(d)(2): will operate properly with a modified version of the library,
if the user installs one, as long as the modified version is
interface-compatible with the version that the work was made with.

Taken all together, LGPLv3 *§*4's primary implications for
redistributors are two-fold, as follows:

If you create a program that links through a shared library mechanism
to a work that is separately distributed under LGPLv3, then you can
distribute the resultant program under a license of your choice and
you need not convey the LGPLv3'd work's source code. If you distribute
the library along with your program, or are the separate distributor
of the work in another context or as another product, you must
distribute its corresponding source under the terms of LGPLv3 or
GPLv3-or-later.

If you choose to statically link or otherwise combine your program
with an LGPLv3'd work via mech- anisms other than a shared library,
you may choose your own license for the work provided the license
terms limitations for user modification, reverse engineering and
debugging are met, and given that the LGPL'd components are still
governed by LGPL's terms. You must offer or provide CCS for the LGPL'd
components. The source code material provided must be sufficient to
regenerate the combined work with a user-modified version of the
LGPL'd components.

