
[]{#_bookmark186 .anchor}**CHAPTER 15**

DETAILS OF COMPLIANT DISTRIBUTION

Distribution of GPL'd works has requirements; copyleft will not
function without placing requirements on redistribution. However, some
requirements are more likely to cause compliance difficult than
others. This chapter[^1^](#_bookmark188) explains some the specific
requirements placed upon distributors of GPL'd software that
redistributors are most likely to overlook, yielding compliance
problems.

First, [GPLv2 1](#gplv2-1-verbatim-copying) and [GPLv2
4](#gplv2-4-termination-on-violation) require that the full license
text must accompany every distribution (either in source or binary
form) of each licensed work. Strangely, this requirement is
responsible for a surprisingly significant fraction of compliance
errors; too often, physical products lack required information about
the presence of GPL'd programs and the applicable license terms.
Automated build processes can and should carry a copy of the license
from the the source distribution into the final binary firmware
package for embedded products. Such automation usually achieves
compliance regarding license inclusion
requirements[^2^](#_bookmark189)

## Binary Distribution Permission

The various versions of the GPL are copyright licenses that grant
permission to make certain uses of software that are otherwise
restricted by copyright law. This permission is conditioned upon
compliance with the GPL's requirements.

This section walks through the requirements (of both GPLv2 and GPLv3)
that apply when you distribute GPL'd programs in binary (i.e.,
executable or object code) form, which is typical for embedded
applications. Because a binary application derives from a program's
original sources, you need permission from the copy- right holder to
distribute it. 3 of GPLv2 and 6 of GPLv3 contain the permissions and
conditions related to binary distributions of GPL'd
programs.[^3^](#_bookmark190) Failure to provide or offer CCS is the
single largest failure mode leading to compliance disputes.

GPL's binary distribution sections offer a choice of compliance
methods, each of which we consider in turn. Each option refers to the
"Corresponding Source" code for the binary distribution, which
includes the source code from which the binary was produced. This
abbreviated and simplified definition is sufficient for the binary
distribution discussion in this section, but you may wish to refer
back to this section after reading the thorough discussion of
"Corresponding Source" that appears in []{#_bookmark188 .anchor}*ยง*
[15.2.](#preparing-corresponding-source)

^1^Note that this chapter refers heavily to specific provisions and
language in [GPLv2 3](#_bookmark257) and [GPLv3 6.](#_bookmark260) It
may be helpful to []{#_bookmark189 .anchor}review
[5.2](#gplv2-3-producing-binaries) and
[9.9](#gplv3-6-non-source-and-corresponding-source) first, and then
have a copy of each license open while reading this section.

^2^[]{#_bookmark190 .anchor}At least one COGEO recommends the [Yocto
Project,](https://www.yoctoproject.org/) since its engineers have
designed such features into it build process. ^3^These sections cannot
be fully understood in isolation; read the entire license thoroughly
before focusing on any particular provision. However, once you have
read and understood the entire license, look to these sections to
guide compliance for binary

distributions.

### Option (a): Source Alongside Binary

GPLv2 3(a) and v3 6(a) embody the easiest option for providing source
code: including Corresponding Source with every binary distribution.
While other options appear initially less onerous, this option invari-
ably minimizes potential compliance problems, because when you
distribute Corresponding Source with the binary, *your GPL obligations
are satisfied at the time of distribution*. This is not true of other
options, and for this reason, we urge you to seriously consider this
option. If you do not, you may extend the duration of your obligations
far beyond your last binary distribution.

Compliance under this option is straightforward. If you ship a product
that includes binary copies of GPL'd software (e.g., in firmware, or
on a hard drive, CD, or other permanent storage medium), you can store
the Corresponding Source alongside the binaries. Alternatively, you
can include the source on a CD or other removable storage medium in
the box containing the product.

GPLv2 refers to the various storage mechanisms as "medi\[a\]
customarily used for software interchange". While the Internet has
attained primacy as a means of software distribution where super-fast
Internet connections are available, GPLv2 was written at a time when
downloading software was not practical (and was often impossible). For
much of the world, this condition has not changed since GPLv2's
publication, and the Internet still cannot be considered "a medium
customary for software interchange". GPLv3 clarifies this matter,
requiring that source be "fixed on a durable physical medium
customarily used for software interchange". This language affirms that
option (a) requires binary redistributors to provide source on a
physical medium.

Please note that while selection of option (a) requires distribution
on a physical medium, voluntary distribution via the Internet is very
useful. This is discussed in detail in *ยง*
[15.1.2.](#option-b-the-offer)

### Option (b): The Offer

Many distributors prefer to ship only an offer for source with the
binary distribution, rather than the complete source package. This
option has value when the cost of source distribution is a true
per-unit cost. For example, this option might be a good choice for
embedded products with permanent storage too small to fit the source,
and which are not otherwise shipped with a CD but *are* shipped with a
manual or other printed material.

However, this option increases the duration of your obligations
dramatically. An offer for source must be good for three full years
from your last binary distribution (under GPLv2), or your last binary
or spare part distribution (under GPLv3). Your source code request and
provisioning system must be designed to last much longer than your
product life cycle. Thus, it also increases your compliance costs in
the long run. In addition, if you are required to comply with the
terms of GPLv2, you **cannot** use a network service to provide the
source code. For GPLv2, the source code offer is fulfilled only with
physical media. This usually means that you must continue to produce
an up-to-date "source code CD" for years after the product's

end-of-life.

Under GPLv2, it is acceptable and advisable for your offer for source
code to include an Internet link for downloadable source *in addition*
to offering source on a physical medium. This practice enables those
with fast network connections to get the source more quickly, and
typically decreases the number of physical media fulfillment requests.
(GPLv3 6(b) permits provision of source with a public
network-accessible distribution only and no physical media. We discuss
this in detail at the end of this section.)

The following is a suggested compliant offer for source under GPLv2
(and is also acceptable for GPLv3) that you would include in your
printed materials accompanying each binary distribution:

The software included in this product contains copyrighted software
that is licensed under the GPL. A copy of that license is included in
this document on page *X*. You may obtain the complete Corresponding
Source code from us for a period of three years after our last
shipment of this product, which will be no earlier than 2011-08-01, by
sending a money order or check for

\$5 to:

GPL Compliance Division Our Company

Any Town, US 99999

Please write "source for product *Y* " in the memo line of your
payment.

You may also find a copy of the source at
<http://www.example.com/sources/Y/>. This offer is valid to anyone in
receipt of this information.

There are a few important details about this offer. First, it requires
a copying fee. GPLv2 permits "a charge no more than your cost of
physically performing source distribution". This fee must be
reasonable. If your cost of copying and mailing a CD is more than
around \$10, you should perhaps find a cheaper CD stock and shipment
method. It is simply not in your interest to try to overcharge the
community. Abuse of this provision in order to make a for-profit
enterprise of source code provision will likely trigger enforcement
action.

Second, note that the last line makes the offer valid to anyone who
requests the source. This is because v2 3(b) requires that offers be
"to give any third party" a copy of the Corresponding Source. GPLv3
has a similar requirement, stating that an offer must be valid for
"anyone who possesses the object code". These requirements indicated
in v2 3(c) and v3 6(c) are so that noncommercial redistributors may
pass these offers along with their distributions. Therefore, the
offers must be valid not only to your customers, but also to anyone
who received a copy of the binaries from them. Many distributors
overlook this requirement and assume that they are only required to
fulfill a request from their direct customers.

The option to provide an offer for source rather than direct source
distribution is a special benefit to companies equipped to handle a
fulfillment process. GPLv2 3(c) and GPLv3 6(c) avoid burdening
noncommercial, occasional redistributors with fulfillment request
obligations by allowing them to pass along the offer for source as
they received it.

Note that commercial redistributors cannot avail themselves of the
option (c) exception, and so while your offer for source must be good
to anyone who receives the offer (under v2) or the object code (under
v3), it *cannot* extinguish the obligations of anyone who commercially
redistributes your product. The license terms apply to anyone who
distributes GPL'd software, regardless of whether they are the
original distributor. Take the example of Vendor *V* , who develops a
software platform from GPL'd sources for use in embedded devices.
Manufacturer *M* contracts with *V* to install the software as
firmware in *M* 's device. *V* provides the software to *M* , along
with a compliant offer for source. In this situation, *M* cannot
simply pass *V* 's offer for source along to its customers. *M* also
distributes the GPL'd software commercially, so *M* too must comply
with the GPL and provide source (or *M* 's *own* offer for source) to
*M* 's customers.

This situation illustrates that the offer for source is often a poor
choice for products that your customers will likely redistribute. If
you include the source itself with the products, then your
distribution to your customers is compliant, and their (unmodified)
distribution to their customers is likewise compliant, because both
include source. If you include only an offer for source, your
distribution is compliant but your customer's distribution does not
"inherit" that compliance, because they have not made their own offer
to accompany their distribution.

The terms related to the offer for source are quite different if you
distribute under GPLv3. Under v3, you may make source available only
over a network server, as long as it is available to the general
public and remains active for three years from the last distribution
of your product or related spare part. Accordingly, you may satisfy
your fulfillment obligations via Internet-only distribution. This
makes the "offer for source" option less troublesome for v3-only
distributions, easing compliance for commercial redistributors.
However, before you switch to a purely Internet-based fulfillment
process, you must first confirm that you can actually distribute *all*
of the software under GPLv3. Some programs are indeed licensed under
"GPLv2, *or any later version*" (often abbreviated "GPLv2-or-later").
Such licensing gives you the option to redistribute under GPLv3.
However, a few popular programs are only licensed under GPLv2 and not
"or any later version" ("GPLv2-only"). You cannot provide only
Internet-based source request fulfillment for the latter programs. If
you determine that all GPL'd works in your whole product allow upgrade
to GPLv3 (or were already

GPLv3'd to start), your offer for source may be as simple as this:

The software included in this product contains copyrighted software
that is licensed under the GPLv3. A copy of that license is included
in this document on page *X*. You may obtain the complete
Corresponding Source code from us for a period of three years after
our last shipment

of this product and/or spare parts therefor, which will be no earlier
than 2011-08-01, on our website at
<http://www.example.com/sources/productnum/>.

Under both GPLv2 and GPLv3, source offers must be accompanied by a
copy of the license itself, either electronically or in print, with
every distribution.

Finally, it is unacceptable to use option (b) merely because you do
not have Corresponding Source ready. We find that some companies
choose this option because writing an offer is easy, but producing a
source distribution as an afterthought to a hasty development process
is difficult. The offer for source does not exist as a stop-gap
solution for companies rushing to market with an out-of-compliance
product. If you ship an offer for source with your product but cannot
actually deliver *immediately* on that offer when your customers
request it, you should expect an enforcement action.

### Option (c): Noncommercial Offers

As discussed in the last section, GPLv2 3(c) and GPLv3 6(c) apply only
to noncommercial use. These options are not available to businesses
distributing GPL'd software. Consequently, companies that redis-
tribute software packaged for them by an upstream vendor cannot merely
pass along the offer they received from the vendor; they must provide
their own offer or corresponding source to their distributees. We talk
in detail about upstream software providers in *ยง*
[18.2.](#upstream-providers)

### Option 6(d) in GPLv3: Internet Distribution

Under GPLv2, your formal provisioning options for Corresponding Source
ended with 3(c). But even under GPLv2, pure Internet source
distribution was a common practice and generally considered to be
compliant. GPLv2 mentions Internet-only distribution almost as aside
in the language, in text at the end of the section after the three
provisioning options are listed. To quote that part of GPLv2 *ยง* 3:

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering
access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent
access to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source along with the object code.

When that was written in 1991, Internet distribution of software was
the exception, not the rule. Some FTP sites existed, but generally
software was sent on magnetic tape or CDs. GPLv2 therefore mostly
assumed that binary distribution happened on some physical media. By
contrast, GPLv3 6(d) explicitly gives an option for this practice that
the community has historically considered GPLv2-compliant.

Thus, you may fulfill your source-provision obligations by providing
the source code in the same way and from the same location. When
exercising this option, you are not obligated to ensure that users
download the source when they download the binary, and you may use
separate servers as needed to fulfill the requests as long as you make
the source as accessible as the binary. However, you must ensure that
users can easily find the source code at the time they download the
binary. GPLv3 6(d) thus clarifies a point that has caused confusion
about source provision in v2. Indeed, many such important
clarifications are included in v3 which together provide a compelling
reason for authors and redistributors alike to adopt GPLv3.

### Option 6(e) in GPLv3: Software Torrents

Peer-to-peer file sharing arose well after GPLv2 was written, and does
not easily fit any of the v2 source provision options. GPLv3 6(e)
addresses this issue, explicitly allowing for distribution of source
and binary together on a peer-to-peer file sharing network. If you
distribute solely via peer-to-peer networks, you can exercise this
option. However, peer-to-peer source distribution *cannot* fulfill
your source provision obligations for non-peer-to-peer binary
distributions. Finally, you should ensure that binaries and source are
equally seeded upon initial peer-to-peer distribution.

## Preparing Corresponding Source

Most enforcement cases involve companies that have unfortunately not
implemented procedures like our [14](#_bookmark176) recommendations
and have no source distribution arranged at all. These companies must
work backwards from a binary distribution to come into compliance. Our
recommendations in [14](#_bookmark176) are designed to make it easy to
construct a complete and Corresponding Source release from the outset.
If you have followed those principles in your development, you can
meet the following requirements with ease. If you have not, you may
have substantial reconstruction work to do.

### Assemble the Sources

For every binary that you produce, you should collect and maintain a
copy of the sources from which it was built. A large system, such as
an embedded firmware, will probably contain many GPL'd and LGPL'd
components for which you will have to provide source. The binary
distribution may also contain proprietary components which are
separate and independent works that are covered by neither the GPL nor
LGPL.

The best way to separate out your sources is to have a subdirectory
for each component in your system. You can then easily mark some of
them as required for your Corresponding Source releases. Collecting
subdirectories of GPL'd and LGPL'd components is the first step toward
preparing your release.

### Building the Sources

Few distributors, particularly of embedded systems, take care to read
the actual definition of Corresponding Source in the GPL. Consider
carefully the definition, from GPLv3:

The "Corresponding Source" for a work in object code form means all
the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable
work) run the object code and to modify the work, including scripts to
control those activities.

and the definition from GPLv2:

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it. For an executable work, complete source
code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to
control compilation and installation of the executable.

Note that you must include "scripts used to control compilation and
installation of the executable" and/or anything "needed to generate,
install, and (for an executable work) run the object code and to
modify the work, including scripts to control those activities". These
phrases are written to cover different types of build environments and
systems. Therefore, the details of what you need to provide with
regard to scripts and installation instructions vary depending on the
software details. You must provide all information necessary such that
someone generally skilled with computer systems could produce a binary
similar to the one provided.

Take as an example an embedded wireless device. Usually, a company
distributes a firmware, which in- cludes a binary copy of
Linux[^4^](#_bookmark199) and a filesystem. That filesystem contains
various binary programs, including some GPL'd binaries, alongside some
proprietary binaries that are separate works (i.e., not derived from,
nor based on freely-licensed sources). Consider what, in this case,
constitutes adequate "scripts to control compilation and installation"
or items "needed to generate, install and run" the GPL'd programs.

Most importantly, you must provide some sort of roadmap that allows
technically sophisticated users to build your software. This can be
complicated in an embedded environment. If your developers use scripts
to control the entire compilation and installation procedure, then you
can simply provide those scripts to users along with the sources they
act upon. Sometimes, however, scripts were never written (e.g., the
information on how to build the binaries is locked up in the mind of
your "build guru"). In that case, we recommend that you write out
build instructions in a natural language as a detailed, step-by-step
readme.

No matter what you offer, you need to give those who receive source a
clear path from your sources to binaries similar to the ones you ship.
If you ship a firmware (kernel plus filesystem), and the filesystem

^4^[]{#_bookmark199 .anchor}"Linux" refers only to the kernel, not the
larger system as a whole.

contains binaries of GPL'd programs, then you should provide whatever
is necessary to enable a reasonably skilled user to build any given
GPL'd source program (and modified versions thereof), and replace the
given binary in your filesystem. If the kernel is Linux, then the
users must have the instructions to do the same with the kernel. The
best way to achieve this is to make available to your users whatever
scripts or process your engineers would use to do the same.

These are the general details for how installation instructions work.
Details about what differs when the work is licensed under LGPL is
discussed in *ยง* [18.1,](#lgpl-compliance) and specific details that
are unique to GPLv3's installation instructions are in *ยง*
[18.4.](#user-products-and-installation-information)

### What About the Compiler?

The GPL contains no provision that requires distribution of the
compiler used to build the software. While companies are encouraged to
make it as easy as possible for their users to build the sources,
inclusion of the compiler itself is not normally considered mandatory.
The Corresponding Source definition -- both in GPLv2 and GPLv3 -- has
not been typically read to include the compiler itself, but rather
things like makefiles, build scripts, and packaging scripts.

Nonetheless, in the interest of goodwill and the spirit of the GPL,
most companies do provide the compiler itself when they are able,
particularly when the compiler is based on GCC or another copylefted
compiler. If you have a GCC-based system, it is your prerogative to
redistribute that GCC version (binaries plus sources) to your
customers. We in the software freedom community encourage you to do
this, since it often makes it easier for users to exercise their
software freedom. However, if you chose to take this recommendation,
ensure that your GCC distribution is itself compliant.

If you have used a proprietary, third-party compiler to build the
software, then you probably cannot ship it to your customers. We
consider the name of the compiler, its exact version number, and where
it can be acquired as information that *must* be provided as part of
the Corresponding Source. This information is essential to anyone who
wishes to produce a binary. It is not the intent of the GPL to require
you to distribute third-party software tools to your customer
(provided the tools themselves are not based on the GPL'd software
shipped), but we do believe it requires that you give the user all the
essential non-proprietary facts that you had at your disposal to build
the software. Therefore, if you choose not to distribute the compiler,
you should include a readme about where you got it, what version it
was, and who to contact to acquire it, regardless of whether your
compiler is Free Software, proprietary, or internally developed.

## Best Practices and Corresponding Source

[14](#_bookmark176) and [15.2](#preparing-corresponding-source) above
are closely related. If you follow the best practices outlined above,
you will find that preparing your Corresponding Source release is an
easier task, perhaps even a trivial one.

Indeed, the enforcement process itself has historically been useful to
software development teams. Devel- opment on a deadline can lead
organizations to cut corners in a way that negatively impacts its
development processes. We have frequently been told by violators that
they experience difficulty when determining the exact source for a
binary in production (in some cases because their "build guru" quit
during the release cycle). When management rushes a development team
to ship a release, they are less likely to keep release sources tagged
and build systems well documented.

We suggest that, if contacted about a violation, product builders use
GPL enforcement as an opportunity to improve their development
practices. No developer would argue that their system is better for
having a mysterious build system and no source tracking. Address these
issues by installing a revision system, telling your developers to use
it, and requiring your build guru to document his or her work!

## Non-Technical Compliance Issues

Certainly, the overwhelming majority of compliance issues are, in
fact, either procedural or technical. Thus, the primary material in
this chapter so far has covered those issues. However, a few
compliance issues do require more direct consideration of a legal
situation. This portion guide does not consider those in detail,

as a careful reading of the earlier chapters of Part [I](#_bookmark1)
shows various places where legal considerations are necessary for
considering compliance activity.

For example, specific compliance issues related to [GPLv2
7,](#gplv2-7-give-software-liberty-or-give-it-death) [GPLv3
7,](#gplv3-7-additional-permissions) and [GPLv3
11](#gplv3-7-additional-permissions) demand a more traditional
approach to legal license compliance. Of course, such analysis and
consideration can be com- plicated, and some are considered in the
enforcement case studies that follow in the next part. However,
compliance issues related to such sections are not rare, and, as is
typical, no specific training is available for dealing with extremely
rare occurrences.

## Self-Assessment of Compliance

Most companies that adopt copylefted software believe they have
complied. Humans usually have difficult admitting their own mistakes,
particularly systematic ones. Therefore, perhaps the most important
necessary step to stay in compliance is a company's regular evaluation
of their own compliance.

First, exercise a request CCS for all copylefted works from all your
upstream providers of software and of components embedding software.
Then, perform your own CCS check on this material first, and verify
that it meets the requirements. This tutorial presents later a case
study of a COGEO's CCS check in [21,](#_bookmark225) which you can
emulate when examining their own CCS.

Second, measure all copyleft compliance from the position of the
users[^5^](#_bookmark204) downstream from you exercising their rights
under GPL. Have those users received notice of the copylefted software
included in your product? Is CCS available to the users easily
(preferably by automated means)? Ask yourself these questions
frequently. If you cannot answer these questions with certainty in the
positive, dig deeper and modify your process.

Avoid "compliance industry" marketing distractions and concentrate on
the copylefted software you already know is in your product.
Historically, the risk from a copylefted code snippet that some
programmer dropped in your proprietary product careless of the
consequences is a problem far more infrequent and less difficult to
resolve. Efficient management of the risks of higher concern lies in
making sure you can provide, for example, precisely CCS for a copy of
Coreboot, the kernel named Linux, BusyBox, or GNU tar that you
included in a product your company shipped two years ago than in the
risk of 10 lines of GPL'd Java code an engineer accidentally pasted
into the source of your ERP system.

Thus, reject the "compliance industry" suggestions that code scanners
find and help solve fundamental compliance problems. Consider how
COGEO's tend to use code scanners. FOSSology is indeed an important
part of a violation investigation, but such is the last step and
catches only some (usually minor) licensing notice problems. Thus,
code scanners can help solve minor compliance problems once you have
resolved the major ones. Code scanners do not manage risk.

^5^[]{#_bookmark204 .anchor}Realizing of course that user very well
may not be your own customer.

