
[]{#_bookmark219 .anchor}**Part III**

**Case Studies in GPL Enforcement**

PREFACE

This one-day course presents the details of five different GPL
compliance cases handled by FSF's GPL Compliance Laboratory. Each case
offers unique insights into problems that can arise when the terms of
the GPL are not properly followed, and how diplomatic negotiation
between the violator and the copyright holder can yield positive
results for both parties.

Attendees should have successfully completely the course, a "Detailed
Study and Analysis of the GPL and LGPL," as the material from that
course forms the building blocks for this material.

This course is of most interest to lawyers who have clients or
employers that deal with Free Software on a regular basis. However,
technical managers and executives whose businesses use or distribute
Free Software will also find the course very helpful.

These course materials are merely a summary of the highlights of the
course presented. Please be aware that during the actual GPL course,
class discussion supplements this printed curriculum. Simply reading
it is not equivalent to attending the course.

[]{#_bookmark220 .anchor}**CHAPTER 20**

OVERVIEW OF COMMUNITY ENFORCEMENT

The GPL is a Free Software license with legal teeth. Unlike licenses
like the X11-style or various BSD licenses, the GPL (and by extension,
the LGPL) is designed to defend as well as grant freedom. We saw in
the last course that the GPL uses copyright law as a mechanism to
grant all the key freedoms essential in Free Software, but also to
ensure that those freedoms propagate throughout the distribution chain
of the software.

## Termination Begins Enforcement

As we have learned, the assurance that Free Software under the GPL
remains Free Software is accomplished through various terms of the
GPL: 3 ensures that binaries are always accompanied with source; 2
ensures that the sources are adequate, complete and usable; 6 and 7
ensure that the license of the software is always the GPL for
everyone, and that no other legal agreements or licenses trump the
GPL. It is 4, however, that ensures that the GPL can be enforced.

Thus, 4 is where we begin our discussion of GPL enforcement. This
clause is where the legal teeth of the license are rooted. As a
copyright license, the GPL governs only the activities governed by
copyright law

--- copying, modifying and redistributing computer software. Unlike
most copyright licenses, the GPL gives wide grants of permission for
engaging with these activities. Such permissions continue, and all
parties may exercise them until such time as one party violates the
terms of the GPL. At the moment of such a violation (i.e., the
engaging of copying, modifying or redistributing in ways not permitted
by the GPL) 4 is invoked. While other parties may continue to operate
under the GPL, the violating party loses their rights.

Specifically, 4 terminates the violators' rights to continue engaging
in the permissions that are otherwise granted by the GPL. Effectively,
their rights revert to the copyright defaults --- no permission is
granted to copy, modify, nor redistribute the work. Meanwhile, 5
points out that if the violator has no rights under the GPL, they are
prohibited by copyright law from engaging in the activities of
copying, modifying and distributing. They have lost these rights
because they have violated the GPL, and no other license gives them
permission to engage in these activities governed by copyright law.

## Ongoing Violations

In conjunction with 4's termination of violators' rights, there is one
final industry fact added to the mix: rarely does one engage in a
single, solitary act of copying, distributing or modifying software.
Almost always, a violator will have legitimately acquired a copy of a
GPL'd program, either making modifications or not,

and then begun distributing that work. For example, the violator may
have put the software in boxes and sold them at stores. Or perhaps the
software was put up for download on the Internet. Regardless of the
delivery mechanism, violators almost always are engaged in *ongoing*
violation of the GPL.

In fact, when we discover a GPL violation that occurred only once ---
for example, a user group who distributed copies of a GNU/Linux system
without source at one meeting --- we rarely pursue it with a high
degree of tenacity. In our minds, such a violation is an educational
problem, and unless the user group becomes a repeat offender (as it
turns out, they never do), we simply forward along a FAQ entry that
best explains how user groups can most easily comply with the GPL, and
send them on their merry way.

It is only the cases of *ongoing* GPL violation that warrant our
active attention. We vehemently pursue those cases where dozens,
hundreds or thousands of customers are receiving software that is out
of compliance, and where the company continually offers for sale (or
distributes gratis as a demo) software distributions that include
GPL'd components out of compliance. Our goal is to maximize the impact
of enforcement and educate industries who are making such a mistake on
a large scale.

In addition, such ongoing violation shows that a particular company is
committed to a GPL'd product line. We are thrilled to learn that
someone is benefiting from Free Software, and we understand that
sometimes they become confused about the rules of the road. Rather
than merely giving us a postmortem to perform on a past mistake, an
ongoing violation gives us an active opportunity to educate a new
contributor to the GPL'd commons about proper procedures to contribute
to the community.

Our central goal is not, in fact, to merely clear up a particular
violation. In fact, over time, we hope that our compliance lab will be
out of business. We seek to educate the businesses that engage in
commerce related to GPL'd software to obey the rules of the road and
allow them to operate freely under them. Just as a traffic officer
would not revel in reminding people which side of the road to drive
on, so we do not revel in violations. By contrast, we revel in the
successes of educating an ongoing violator about the GPL so that GPL
compliance becomes a second-nature matter, allowing that company to
join the GPL ecosystem as a contributor.

## How are Violations Discovered?

Our enforcement of the GPL is not a fund-raising effort; in fact,
FSF's GPL Compliance Lab runs at a loss (in other words, it is
subsided by our donors). Our violation reports come from volunteers,
who have encountered, in their business or personal life, a device or
software product that appears to contain GPL'd software. These reports
are almost always sent via email to
*\<*<license-violation@fsf.org>*\>*.

Our first order of business, upon receiving such a report, is to seek
independent confirmation. When possible, we get a copy of the software
product. For example, if it is an offering that is downloadable from a
Web site, we download it and investigate ourselves. When it is not
possible for us to actually get a copy of the software, we ask the
reporter to go through the same process we would use in examining the
software.

By rough estimation, about 95% of violations at this stage can be
confirmed by simple commands. Almost all violators have merely made an
error and have no nefarious intentions. They have made no attempt to
remove our copyright notices from the software. Thus, given the
third-party binary, tpb, usually, a simple command (on a GNU/Linux
system) such as the following will find a Free Software copyright
notice and GPL reference:

strings tpb \| grep Copyright

In other words, it is usually more than trivial to confirm that GPL'd
software is included.

Once we have confirmed that a violation has indeed occurred, we must
then determine whose copyright has been violated. Contrary to popular
belief, FSF does not have the power to enforce the GPL in all cases.
Since the GPL operates under copyright law, the powers of enforcement
--- to seek redress once 4 has been invoked --- lie with the copyright
holder of the software. FSF is one of the largest copyright holders in
the world of GPL'd software, but we are by no means the only one.
Thus, we sometimes discover that while GPL'd code is present in the
software, there is no software copyrighted by FSF present.

In cases where FSF does not hold copyright interest in the software,
but we have confirmed a violation, we contact the copyright holders of
the software, and encourage them to enforce the GPL. We offer our good
offices to help negotiate compliance on their behalf, and many times,
we help as a third party to settle

such GPL violations. However, what we will describe primarily in this
course is FSF's first-hand experience enforcing its own copyrights and
the GPL.

## First Contact

The Free Software community is built on a structure of voluntary
cooperation and mutual help. Our community has learned that
cooperation works best when you assume the best of others, and only
change policy, procedures and attitudes when some specific event or
occurrence indicates that a change is necessary. We treat the process
of GPL enforcement in the same way. Our goal is to encourage violators
to join the cooperative community of software sharing, so we want to
open our hand in friendship.

Therefore, once we have confirmed a violation, our first assumption is
that the violation is an oversight or otherwise a mistake due to
confusion about the terms of the license. We reach out to the violator
and ask them to work with us in a collaborative way to bring the
product into compliance. We have received the gamut of possible
reactions to such requests, and in this course, we examine four
specific examples of such compliance work.

