
[]{#_bookmark241 .anchor}**CHAPTER 22**

BORTEZ: MODIFIED GCC SDK

In our first case study, we will consider Bortez, a company that
produces software and hardware toolkits to assist OEM vendors, makers
of consumer electronic devices.

## Facts

One of Bortez's key products is a Software Development Kit ("SDK")
designed to assist developers building software for a specific class
of consumer electronics devices.

FSF received a report that the SDK may be based on the GNU Compiler
Collection (which is an FSF- copyrighted collection of tools for
software development in C, C++ and other popular languages). FSF
investigated the claim, but was unable to confirm the violation. The
violation reporter was unresponsive to follow-up requests for more
information.

Since FSF was unable to confirm the violation, we did not pursue it
any further. Bogus reports do happen, and we do not want to burden
companies with specious GPL violation complaints. FSF shelved the
matter until more evidence was discovered.

FSF was later able to confirm the violation when two additional
reports surfaced from other violation reporters, both of whom had used
the SDK professionally and noticed clear similarities to FSF's GNU
GCC. FSF's Compliance Engineer asked the reporters to run standard
tests to confirm the violation, and it was confirmed that Bortez's SDK
was indeed a modified version of GCC. Bortez had ported to Windows and
added a number of features, including support for a specific consumer
device chipset and additional features to aid in the linking process
("LP") for those specific devices. FSF explained the rights that the
GPL afforded these customers and pointed out, for example, that Bortez
only needed to provide source to those in possession of the binaries,
and that the users may need to request that source (if 3(b) was
exercised). The violators confirmed that such requests were not
answered.

FSF brought the matter to the attention of Bortez, who immediately
escalated the matter to their attorneys. After a long negotiation,
Bortez acknowledged that their SDK was indeed a modified version of
GCC. Bortez released most of the source, but some disagreement
occurred over whether LP was also derivative of GCC. After repeated
FSF inquiries, Bortez reaudited the source to discover that FSF's
analysis was correct. Bortez determined that LP included a number of
source files copied from the GCC code-base. Once the full software
release was made available, FSF asked the violation reporters if it
addressed the problem. Reports came back that the source did not
properly build. FSF asked Bortez to provide better build instructions
with the software, and such build instructions were incorporated into
the next software

release.

At FSF's request as well, Bortez informed customers who had previously
purchased the product that the source was now available by announcing
the availability on its Web site and via a customer newsletter.

Bortez did have some concerns regarding patents. They wished to
include a statement with the software release that made sure they were
not granting any patent permission other than what was absolutely
required by the GPL. They understood that their patent assertions
could not trump any rights granted by the GPL. The following language
was negotiated into the release:

Subject to the qualifications stated below, Bortez, on behalf of
itself and its Subsidiaries, agrees not to assert the Claims against
you for your making, use, offer for sale, sale, or importation of the
Bortez's GNU Utilities or derivative works of the Bortez's GNU
Utilities ("Derivatives"), but only to the extent that any such
Derivatives are licensed by you under the terms of the GNU General
Public License. The Claims are the claims of patents that Bortez or
its Subsidiaries have standing to enforce that are directly infringed
by the making, use, or sale of an Bortez Distributed GNU Utilities in
the form it was distributed by Bortez and that do not include any
limitation that reads on hardware; the Claims do not include any
additional patent claims held by Bortez that cover any modifications
of, derivative works based on or combinations with the Bortez's GNU
Utilities, even if such a claim is disclosed in the same patent as a
Claim. Subsidiaries are entities that are wholly owned by Bortez.

This statement does not negate, limit or restrict any rights you
already have under the GNU General Public License version 2.

This quelled Bortez's concerns about other patent licensing they
sought to do outside of the GPL'd software, and satisfied FSF's
concerns that Bortez give proper permissions to exercise teachings of
patents that were exercised in their GPL'd software release.

Finally, a GPL Compliance Officer inside Bortez was appointed to take
responsibility for all matters of GPL compliance inside the company.
Bortez is responsible for informing FSF if the position is given to
someone else inside the company, and making sure that FSF has direct
contact with Bortez's Compliance Officer.

## Lessons

This case introduces a number of concepts regarding GPL enforcement.

1.  **Enforcement should not begin until the evidence is confirmed.**
    > Most companies that distribute GPL'd software do so in compliance,
    > and at times, violation reports are mistaken. Even with extensive
    > efforts in GPL education, many users do not fully understand their
    > rights and the obligations that companies have. By working through
    > the investigation with reporters, the violation can be properly
    > confirmed, and **the user of the software can be educated about
    > what to expect with GPL'd software**. When users and customers of
    > GPL'd products know their rights, what to expect, and how to
    > properly exercise their rights (particularly under 3(b)), it
    > reduces the chances for user frustration and inappropriate
    > community outcry about an alleged GPL violation.

2.  **GPL compliance requires friendly negotiation and cooperation.**
    > Often, attorneys and man- agers are legitimately surprised to find
    > out GPL'd software is included in their company's products.
    > Engineers sometimes include GPL'd software without understanding
    > the requirements. This does not excuse companies from their
    > obligations under the license, but it does mean that care and
    > patience are essential for reaching GPL compliance. We want
    > companies to understand that participating and benefiting from a
    > collaborative Free Software community is not a burden, so we
    > strive to make the process of coming into compliance as smooth as
    > possible.

3.  **Confirming compliance is a community effort.** The whole point of
    > making sure that software distributors respect the terms of the
    > GPL is to allow a thriving software sharing community to benefit
    > and improve the work. FSF is not the expert on how a compiler for
    > consumer electronic devices should work. We therefore inform the
    > community who originally brought the violation to our attention
    > and ask them to assist in evaluation and confirmation of the
    > product's compliance. Of course, FSF coordinates and oversees the
    > process, but we do not want compliance for compliance's sake;
    > rather, we wish to foster a cooperating community of development
    > around the Free Software in question, and encourage the
    > once-violator to begin participating in that community.

4.  **Informing the harmed community is part of compliance.** FSF asks
    > violators to make some attempt --- such as via newsletters and the
    > company's Web site --- to inform those who already have the
    > products as to their rights under the GPL. One of the key thrusts
    > of the GPL's 1 and 3 is to *make sure the user knows she has these
    > rights*. If a product was received out of compliance by a
    > customer, she may never actually discover that she has such
    > rights. Informing customers, in a way that is not burdensome but
    > has a high probability of successfully reaching those who would
    > seek to exercise their freedoms, is essential to properly remedy
    > the mistake.

5.  **Lines between various copyright, patent, and other legal
    > mechanisms must be precisely de- fined and considered.** The most
    > difficult negotiation point of the Bortez case was drafting
    > language that simultaneously protected Bortez's patent rights
    > outside of the GPL'd source, but was consistent with the implicit
    > patent grant in the GPL. As we discussed in the first course of
    > this series, there is indeed an implicit patent grant with the
    > GPL, thanks to 6 and 7. However, many companies become nervous and
    > wish to make the grant explicit to assure themselves that the
    > grant is sufficiently narrow for their needs. We understand that
    > there is no reasonable way to determine what patent claims read on
    > a company's GPL holdings and which do not, so we do not object to
    > general language that explicitly narrows the patent grant to only
    > those patents that were, in fact, exercised by the GPL'd software
    > as released by the company.

