
[]{#_bookmark244 .anchor}**CHAPTER 23**

BRACKEN: A MINOR VIOLATION IN A GNU/LINUX DISTRIBUTION

In this case study, we consider a minor violation made by a company
whose knowledge of the Free Software community and its functions is
deep.

## The Facts

Bracken produces a GNU/Linux operating system product that is sold
primarily to OEM vendors to be placed in appliance devices used for a
single purpose, such as an Internet-browsing-only device. The product
is almost 100% Free Software, mostly licensed under the GPL and
related Free Software licenses.

FSF found out about this violation through a report first posted on a
Slashdot[^1^](#_bookmark246) comment, and then it was brought to our
attention again by another Free Software copyright holder who had
discovered the same violation.

Bracken's GNU/Linux product is delivered directly from their Web site.
This allowed FSF engineers to directly download and confirm the
violation quickly. Two primary problems were discovered with the
online distribution:

No source code nor offer for source code was provided for a number of
components for the distributed GNU/Linux system; only binaries were
available

An End User License Agreement ("EULA") was included that contradicted
the permissions granted by the GPL

FSF contacted Bracken and gave them the details of the violation.
Bracken immediately ceased distri- bution of the product temporarily
and set forth a plan to bring themselves back into compliance. This
plan included the following steps:

Bracken attorneys would rewrite the EULA to comply with the GPL and
would vet the new EULA through FSF before use

Bracken engineers would provide source side-by-side with the binaries
for the GNU/Linux distribution on the site (and on CD's, if ever they
distributed that way)

Bracken attorneys would run an internal seminar for its engineers
regarding proper GPL compliance to help ensure that such oversights
regarding source releases would not occur in the future

^1^[]{#_bookmark246 .anchor}Slashdot is a popular news and discussion
site for technical readers.

Bracken would resume distribution of the product only after FSF
formally restored Bracken's distri- bution rights

This case was completed in about a month. FSF approved the new EULA
text. The key portion in the EULA relating to the GPL read as follows:

Many of the Software Programs included in Bracken Software are
distributed under the terms of agreements with Third Parties ("Third
Party Agreements") which may expand or limit the Licensee's rights to
use certain Software Programs as set forth in \[this EULA\]. Certain
Software Programs may be licensed (or sublicensed) to Licensee under
the GNU General Public License and other similar license agreements
listed in part in this section which, among other rights, permit the
Licensee to copy, modify and redistribute certain Software Programs,
or portions thereof, and have access to the source code of certain
Software Programs, or portions thereof. In addition, certain Software
Programs, or portions thereof, may be licensed (or sublicensed) to
Licensee under terms stricter than those set forth in \[this EULA\].
The Licensee must review the electronic documentation that accompanies
certain Software Programs, or portions thereof, for the applicable
Third Party Agreements. To the extent any Third Party Agreements
require that Bracken provide rights to use, copy or modify a Software
Program that are broader than the rights granted to the Licensee in
\[this EULA\], then such rights shall take precedence over the rights
and restrictions granted in this Agreement solely for such Software
Programs.

FSF restored Bracken's distribution rights shortly after the work was
completed as described.

## Lessons Learned

This case was probably the most quickly and easily resolved of all GPL
violations in the history of FSF's Compliance Lab. The ease with which
the problem was resolved shows a number of cultural factors that play
a role in GPL compliance.

1.  **Companies that understand Free Software culture better have an
    > easier time with compli- ance.** Bracken's products were designed
    > and built around the GNU/Linux system and Free Software
    > components. Their engineers were deeply familiar with the Free
    > Software ecosystem, and their lawyers had seen and reviewed the
    > GPL before. The violation was completely an honest mistake. Since
    > the culture inside the company had already adapted to the
    > cooperative style of resolution in the Free Software world, there
    > was very little work for either party to bring the product into
    > compliance.

2.  **When people in key positions understand the Free Software nature
    > of their software products, compliance concerns are as mundane as
    > minor software bugs.** Even the most functional system or
    > structure has its problems, and successful business often depends
    > on agile response to the problems that do come up; avoiding
    > problems altogether is a pipe dream. Minor GPL violations can and
    > do happen even with well-informed redistributors. However,
    > resolution is reached quickly when the company --- and in
    > particular, the lawyers, managers, and engineers working on the
    > Free Software product lines --- have adapted to Free Software
    > culture that the lower-level engineer already understood

3.  **Legally, distribution must stop when a violation is identified.**
    > In our opinion, Bracken went above and beyond the call of duty by
    > ceasing distribution while the violation was being resolved. Under
    > GPL 4, the redistributor loses the right to distribute the
    > software, and thus they are in ongoing violation of copyright law
    > if they distribute before rights are restored. It is FSF's policy
    > to temporarily allow distribution while compliance negotiations
    > are ongoing and only in the most extreme cases (where the other
    > party appears to be negotiating in bad faith) does FSF even
    > threaten an injunction on copyright grounds. However, Bracken ---
    > as a good Free Software citizen --- chose to be on the safe side
    > and do the legally correct thing while the violation case was
    > pending. From start to finish, it took less than a month to
    > resolve. This lapse in distribution did not, to FSF's knowledge,
    > impact Bracken's business in any way.

4.  **EULAs are a common area for GPL problems.** Often, EULAs are
    > drafted from boilerplate text that a company uses for all its
    > products. Even the most diligent attorneys forget or simply do not
    > know that a product contains software licensed under the GPL and
    > other Free Software licenses. Drafting a EULA that accounts for
    > such licenses is straightforward; the text quoted above works just
    > fine. The EULA must be designed so that it does not trump rights
    > and permissions already granted by the GPL. The EULA must clearly
    > state that if there is a conflict between it and the GPL, with
    > regard to GPL'd code, the GPL is the overriding license.

5.  **Compliance Officers are rarely necessary when companies are
    > educated about GPL com- pliance.** As we saw in the Bortez case,
    > FSF asks that a formal "GPL Compliance Officer" be appointed
    > inside a previously violating organization to shepherd the
    > organization to a cooperative approach to GPL compliance. However,
    > when FSF sees that an organization already has such an approach,
    > there is no need to request that such an officer be appointed.

