# Appendices

## Appendix 1: The Open Compliance Program

#### Other Open Source Compliance Publications

##### Free and Open Source Software Compliance: The Basics You Must Know13

This paper provides basic discussion on the changing business
environment moving to a multi-source development model, the objectives
of compliance, the benefits resulting from having a successful
compliance program, and much more.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### Free and Open Source Software Compliance: Who Does What14

Ever since companies started integrating FOSS in their products, there
has been the need to ensure compliance with applicable FOSS licenses.
Different companies have used various ways to structure their teams
responsible for fulfilling this function. Other companies have opted
for cross-functional teams that include a dedicated Open Source
Compliance Officer who has access to various individuals and teams
that contribute to the compliance effort without being part of a
centralized team. In this paper, we examine the latter model of a FOSS
compliance team and discuss the roles and responsibilities of
individuals and teams involved in the compliance process.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

13. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-](https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-compliance-basics-you-must-know)
    [compliance-basics-you-must-know](https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-compliance-basics-you-must-know)**

14. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-](https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-compliance-who-does-what)
    [compliance-who-does-what](https://www.linux.com/publications/free-and-open-source-software-compliance-who-does-what)**

##### Establishing Free and Open Source Software Compliance Programs: Challenges and Solutions15

This white paper focuses on the practical aspects of ensuring free and
open source software (FOSS) compliance in the enterprise.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### Keys to Managing a FOSS Compliance Program16

This paper examines the managerial practices needed to plan,
coordinate, and control a successful compliance program.

Author: Philip Koltun (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### A Five-Step Compliance Process for FOSS Identification and Review17

This white paper focuses on the various practical aspects of ensuring
free and open source software (FOSS) compliance in the enterprise.
This paper provides a sample five-step compliance process for FOSS
identification and review. The paper focuses on using and integrating
FOSS with proprietary and third party source code in a commercial
product.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### Achieving FOSS Compliance in the Enterprise18

This white paper focuses on the various practical aspects of ensuring
free and open source software (FOSS) compliance in

15. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/establishing-free-and-open-](https://www.linux.com/publications/establishing-free-and-open-source-software-compliance-programs-challenges-and-solutions)
    [source-software-compliance-programs-challenges-and-solutions](https://www.linux.com/publications/establishing-free-and-open-source-software-compliance-programs-challenges-and-solutions)**

16. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/keys-managing-foss-compliance-](https://www.linux.com/publications/keys-managing-foss-compliance-program)
    [program](https://www.linux.com/publications/keys-managing-foss-compliance-program)**

17. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/five-step-compliance-process-](https://www.linux.com/publications/five-step-compliance-process-foss-identification-and-review)
    [foss-identification-and-review](https://www.linux.com/publications/five-step-compliance-process-foss-identification-and-review)**

18. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/achieving-foss-compliance-](https://www.linux.com/publications/achieving-foss-compliance-enterprise)
    [enterprise](https://www.linux.com/publications/achieving-foss-compliance-enterprise)**

the enterprise. This paper examines a sample end-to-end compliance
process.

Author: Ibrahim Haddad (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

##### FOSS Compliance Practices for Supplied Software19

This white paper examines compliance practices necessary when software
supplied by a third party vendor is brought into the code baseline of
a product to be distributed externally. The paper discusses
requirements a company should impose upon its suppliers to disclose
FOSS in their deliverables and to provide what's needed to achieve
compliance. It also discusses steps a company should take to review
and validate the FOSS disclosures made by its suppliers. In addition
to those topics, the white paper addresses measures a company can
undertake to assess its suppliers' compliance capabilities.

Author: Philip Koltun (Ph.D.), The Linux Foundation

#### Compliance Templates

##### Self-Assessment Checklist

The Linux Foundation has compiled this extensive checklist of
compliance practices found in industry-leading compliance programs.
Companies can use this checklist as a confidential internal tool to
assess their progress in implementing a rigorous compliance process
and to help them prioritize process-improvement efforts. The
Self-Assessment Checklist is constructed using at least two concepts
from well-established models of process maturity, such as the Software
Engineering Institute's Capability Maturity Model:

-   A distinction should be made between process goals and the practices
    implemented to achieve those goals. The

19. **[https://www.linux.com/publications/foss-compliance-practices-](https://www.linux.com/publications/foss-compliance-practices-supplied-software)
    [supplied-software](https://www.linux.com/publications/foss-compliance-practices-supplied-software)**

compliance checklist explicitly recognizes valid alternative practices
that may be used to achieve a particular goal.

-   Process adoption progresses from initial process definition through
    institutionalization to a state of controlled process management.
    The goal of a compliance process, as with any process, is to achieve
    consistent and expected business results from its use. A checklist
    of recommended practices should prompt companies to assess the
    extent to which they've institutionalized compliance actions and to
    which those actions produce needed business results.

Compliance practices included in the checklist will improve the
effectiveness of compliance programs as well as deliver tangible
benefits relative to the cost of those practices. A process failure
modes effects analysis (FMEA) approach has been used to identify the
ways in which a compliance process can fail and practices to prevent
those process failures.

Author: The Linux Foundation

##### Generic FOSS Policy

Companies using FOSS often create a company-wide policy to ensure that
all staff is informed of how to use FOSS (especially in products), to
maximize the impact and benefit of using FOSS, and to ensure that any
technical, legal, or business risks resulting from that usage are
properly mitigated. This document is a new free resource available
from the Linux Foundation under the Open Compliance Program. It offers
a generic FOSS policy that companies can use as starting point in
creating their own FOSS policy. It provides a template policy that
focuses on governing FOSS usage in externally distributed products and
that can be customized to the company's specific needs.

Author: The Linux Foundation

##### Template for an Approval Request Form for the Use of Free and Open Source Software

This document is one of the free resources made available by The Linux
Foundation Open Compliance Program. It offers a template for the
Approval Request Form used by developers to request approval to use
Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) in a commercial product. The
company's Open Source Review Board (OSRB) then reviews the submission
and determines approval. In most cases, the submission, review, and
approval of such requests is managed via an online submission system
that is part of the company's FOSS compliance management process.

Author: The Linux Foundation

## Appendix 2: Compliance Standards

Education and training build a base of knowledgeable resources to
guide your open source journey. However, these tools alone will not
solve efficiency issues if everyone implements compliance processes
differently. The Linux Foundation projects enable the industry to
develop compliance standards for companies and entire supply chains to
exchange compliance data in a consistent way.

-   OpenChain identifies common best practices in open source compliance
    that should be applied as a standard across a supply chain.20

-   SPDX Specifications enable projects and organizations to communicate
    accurate summaries of the licensing and copyright information in
    software deliverables.21

-   SPDX License List is a curated list of commonly found licenses that
    can be referenced by the use of a standardized

20. [**https://www.openchainproject.org**](https://www.openchainproject.org/)

21. [**https://spdx.org/specifications**](https://spdx.org/specifications)

[]{#_bookmark37 .anchor}short identifier per license. For each short
identifier, the list contains the full name for each license, vetted
license text, other basic information, and a canonical permanent URL
for each license and exception.22

-   SPDX Meta Tags enable the use of the standardized short identifier
    in source code to efficiently refer to a license without having to
    redundantly reproduce the full license.23

## Appendix 3: Professional Networks

You're not alone in your open source compliance journey. Many of our
members have found it beneficial to participate in the projects we
host, simply to access the network of experts participating in the
projects. In addition, The Linux Foundation hosts professional
networks to help compliance professionals find each other and
collaborate on ways to improve compliance practices, tooling, and
processes.

-   TODO Group24

-   Compliance Directory25

-   OpenChain26

22. [**https://spdx.org/license-list**](https://spdx.org/license-list)

23. [**http://wiki.spdx.org/view/Technical_Team/SPDX_Meta_Tags**](http://wiki.spdx.org/view/Technical_Team/SPDX_Meta_Tags)

24. [**http://todogroup.org/**](http://todogroup.org/)

25. **[https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org/references/open-compliance-](https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org/references/open-compliance-directory)
    [directory](https://compliance.linuxfoundation.org/references/open-compliance-directory)**

26. [**https://www.openchainproject.org**](https://www.openchainproject.org/)

## Appendix 4: Tools and Infrastructure

To achieve higher levels of scale and reduce the overhead costs of
compliance, companies have contributed to creating open source tools
and infrastructure to achieve compliance at a lower cost, increasing
not only cross-organization efficiency but also integration of
compliance with product development.

-   **FOSSology** scans codebases, identifies licenses in use, creates
    machine readable license lists, and enables automatic notice-file
    creation.27

-   **FOSS Bar Code Tracker** simplifies the way FOSS components are
    tracked and reported in commercial products. The tool allows
    companies to easily generate custom QR codes for each product
    containing FOSS. The QR codes contain important information about
    the FOSS stack contained in a product, such as component names,
    version numbers, license information, and links to download the
    source code, among other details.28

-   **SPDX Tools** are tools for validating, transforming, reading, and
    writing SPDX format files. SPDX Tools also provides links to
    community-maintained and commercially available tools that support
    SPDX.29

-   **Dependency Checker** is capable of identifying code combinations
    at the dynamic and static link level. The tool also offers a license
    policy framework that enables FOSS compliance officers to define
    combinations of licenses and linkage methods that are to be flagged
    if found as a result of running the tool.30

27. [**https://www.fossology.org/**](https://www.fossology.org/)

28. [**http://git.linuxfoundation.org/?p=foss-barcode.git;a=summary**](http://git.linuxfoundation.org/?p=foss-barcode.git%3Ba%3Dsummary)

29. [**http://spdx.org/tools**](http://spdx.org/tools)

30. [**http://git.linuxfoundation.org/dep-checker.git**](http://git.linuxfoundation.org/dep-checker.git)

    -   **The Code Janitor** provides linguistic review capabilities to
        make sure developers did not leave comments in the source
        code.31

31. [**http://git.linuxfoundation.org/janitor.git**](http://git.linuxfoundation.org/janitor.git)

# "So long, and thanks for all the fish."

DOUGLAS ADAMS

![](media/image8.png)**Practical GPL Compliance** is a guide for
startups, small businesses, and engineers tasked with shipping
products that contain GNU General Public License Version 2 (GPLv2)
code. It is directly applicable to consumer electronics, drones, IoT,
or automotive devices based on generic Linux or Android code- bases.
It provides simple instructions, checklists, and flowcharts that
empower compliance teams to work with open source as efficiently as
possible.

The goal of this guide is to demystify GPL Compliance Engineering and
to make it possible for every stakeholder in open source to quickly
address common issues. The focus is on solving real world challenges
in a manner that lays the foundation for addressing open source
compliance more broadly in organizations of all sizes.

\"Today it takes more than simple legal advice to be compliant with
the requirements of open source licenses. This guide is based on the
long-term experience of the authors and represents a unique collection
of practical information about how to solve the technical challenges
compliance engineers are facing.\"

-   Dr. Till Jaeger, Partner at JBB Rechtsanwälte

\"Shane Coughlan and Armijn Hemel have created a wonderful resource
for anyone working with open source software being shipped in a
device. They describe in detail how to ensure compliance with the
various software licenses and communities in which we all rely on.\"

-   Greg Kroah-Hartman, Linux Kernel Maintainer and Fellow at The Linux
    Foundation

\"Armijn Hemel is the world\'s foremost expert on the technical
aspects of GPL compliance. This book is an indispensable starting
point for all compliance engineers.\"

-   Professor Eben Moglen, President and Executive Director at Software
    Freedom Law Center

"A practical guide with hands-on advice that condenses the significant
experience of pioneers in GPL compliance who actually made some of the
tools of the trade. Given their longstanding and recognized experience
in compliance this is one of the most keenly awaited texts by
compliance advisors and in-house officers. I am glad we now have it
and that it exceeds my high expectations."

-   Carlo Piana, Founder at Array Law and General Counsel at Free
    Software Foundation Europe e.V.
