
[]{#_bookmark164 .anchor}**CHAPTER 12**

INTEGRATING THE GPL INTO BUSINESS PRACTICES

Since GPL'd software is now extremely prevalent through the industry,
it is useful to have some basic knowledge about using GPL'd software
in business and how to build business models around GPL'd software.

## Using GPL'd Software In-House

As discussed in Sections [3.1](#gplv2-0-freedom-to-run) and
[7.2](#gplv2-5-acceptance-copyright-style) of this tutorial, the GPL
only governs the activities of copying, modifying and distributing
software programs that are not governed by the license. Thus, in FSF's
view, simply installing the software on a machine and using it is not
controlled or limited in any way by the GPL. Using Free Software in
general requires substantially fewer agreements and less license
compliance activity than any known proprietary software.

Even if a company engages heavily in copying the software throughout
the enterprise, such copying is not only permitted by GPLv2 1 and 3,
but it is encouraged! If the company simply deploys unmodified (or
even modified) Free Software throughout the organization for its
employees to use, the obligations under the license are very minimal.
Using Free Software has a substantially lower cost of ownership ---
both in licensing fees and in licensing checking and handling -- than
the proprietary software equivalents.

## Business Models

Using Free Software in house is certainly helpful, but a thriving
market for Free Software-oriented business models also exists. There
is the traditional model of selling copies of Free Software
distributions. Many companies make substantial revenue from this
model. Some choose this model because they have found that for
higher-end hardware, the profit made from proprietary software
licensing fees is negligible. The real profit is in the hardware, but
it is essential that software be stable, reliable and dependable, and
the users be allowed to have unfettered access to it. Free Software,
and GPL'd software in particular, is the right choice. For instance
IBM can be assured that proprietary versions of the their software
will not exist to compete on their hardware.

For example, charging a "convenience fee" for Free Software, when set
at a reasonable price (around \$60 or so), can produce some profit.
Even though Red Hat's system is fully downloadable on their Web site,
people still go to local computer stores and buy copies of their box
set, which is simply a printed version of the manual (available under
a Free license as well) and the Free Software system it documents.

Custom support, service, and software improvement contracts are the
most widely used models for GPL'd software. The GPL is central to
their success, because it ensures that the code base remains common,
and

that large and small companies are on equal footing for access to the
technology. Consider, for example, the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC).
Cygnus Solutions, a company started in the early 1990s, was able to
grow steadily simply by providing services for GCC --- mostly
consisting of new ports of GCC to different or new, embedded targets.
Eventually, Cygnus was so successful that it was purchased by Red Hat
where it remains a profitable division.

However, there are very small companies that compete in this space.
Modern industry demands the trust created by GPL protected code-bases.
Companies can cooperate on the software and improve it for everyone.
Meanwhile, companies who rely on GCC for their work are happy to pay
for improvements, and for ports to new target platforms. Nearly all
the changes fold back into the standard versions, and those forks that
exist remain freely available.

A final common business model that is perhaps the most controversial
is proprietary relicensing of a GPL'd code base. This is only an
option for software in which a particular entity holds exclusive
rights to relicense.[^1^](#_bookmark168) As discussed earlier in this
tutorial, a copyright holder is permitted under copyright law to
license a software system under her copyright as many different ways
as she likes to as many different parties as she wishes.

Some companies use this to their financial advantage with regard to a
GPL'd code base. The standard version is available from the company
under the terms of the GPL. However, parties can purchase separate
proprietary software licensing for a fee.

This business model is at best problematic and at worst predatory
because it means that the GPL'd code base must be developed in a
somewhat monolithic way, because volunteer Free Software developers
may be reluctant to assign their copyrights to the company because it
will not promise to always and forever license the software as Free
Software. Indeed, the company will surely use such code contributions
in proprietary versions licensed for fees.

## Ongoing Compliance

GPL compliance is in fact a very simple matter --- much simpler than
typical proprietary software agreements and EULAs. Usually, the most
difficult hurdle is changing from a proprietary software mindset to
one that seeks to foster a community of sharing and mutual support.
Certainly complying with the GPL from a users' perspective gives
substantially fewer headaches than proprietary license compliance.

For those who go into the business of distributing *modified* versions
of GPL'd software, the burden is a bit higher, but not by much. The
glib answer is that by releasing the whole product as Free Software,
it is always easy to comply with the GPL. However, admittedly to the
dismay of FSF, many modern and complex software systems are built
using both proprietary and GPL'd components that are clearly and
legally separate and independent works, merely aggregated together on
the same device.

However, it sometimes is easier, quicker, and cheaper to simply
improve an existing GPL'd application than to start from scratch. In
exchange for this amazing benefit, the license requires that the
modifier gives back to the commons that made the work easier in the
first place. It is a reasonable trade-off and a way to help build a
better world while also making a profit.

Note that FSF does provide services to assist companies who need
assistance in complying with the GPL. You can contact FSF's GPL
Compliance Labs at *\<*<licensing@fsf.org>*\>*.

If you are particularly interested in matters of GPL compliance, we
recommend the next two parts, which include both recommendations on
good compliance and compliance case studies.

^1^[]{#_bookmark168 .anchor}Entities typically hold exclusive
relicensing rights either by writing all the software under their own
copyrights, collect- ing copyright assignments from all contributors,
or by otherwise demanding unconditional relicensing permissions from
all contributors via some legal agreement

