
[]{#_bookmark169 .anchor}**Part II**

**A Practical Guide to GPL Compliance**

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This is a guide to effective compliance with the GNU General Public
License (GPL) and related licenses. Copyleft advocates usually seek to
assist the community with GPL compliance cooperatively. This guide
focuses on complying from the start, so that readers can learn to
avoid enforcement actions entirely, or, at least, minimize the
negative impact when enforcement actions occur. This guide introduces
and explains basic legal concepts related to the GPL and its
enforcement by copyright holders. It also outlines business practices
and methods that lead to better GPL compliance. Finally, it recommends
proper post-violation responses to the concerns of copyright holders.

[]{#_bookmark170 .anchor}**CHAPTER 13**

BACKGROUND

Copyright law grants exclusive rights to authors. Authors who chose
copyleft seek to protect the freedom of users and developers to copy,
share, modify and redistribute the software. However, copyleft is
ultimately implemented through copyright, and the GPL is primarily and
by default a copyright license. (See
[1.2](#how-does-software-become-free) for more about the interaction
between copyright and copyleft.) Copyright law grants an unnatural
exclusive control to copyright holders regarding copyright-controlled
permissions related to the work. Therefore, copyright holders (or
their agents) are the ultimately the sole authorities to enforce
copyleft and protect the rights of users. Actions for copyright
infringement are the ultimate legal mechanism for enforcement.
Therefore, copyright holders, or collaborative groups of copyright
holders, have historically been the actors in GPL enforcement.

The earliest of these efforts began soon after the GPL was written by
Richard M. Stallman (RMS) in 1989, and consisted of informal community
efforts, often in public Usenet discussions.[^1^](#_bookmark171) Over
the next decade, the Free Software Foundation (FSF), which holds
copyrights in many GNU programs, was the only visible entity actively
enforcing its GPL'd copyrights on behalf of the software freedom
community. FSF's enforcement was generally a private process; the FSF
contacted violators confidentially and helped them to comply with the
license. Most violations were pursued this way until the early 2000's.

By that time, Linux-based systems such as GNU/Linux and BusyBox/Linux
had become very common, particularly in embedded devices such as
wireless routers. During this period, public ridicule of violators in
the press and on Internet fora supplemented ongoing private
enforcement and increased pressure on businesses to comply. In 2003,
the FSF formalized its efforts into the GPL Compliance Lab, increased
the volume of enforcement, and built community coalitions to encourage
copyright holders to together settle amicably with violators.
Beginning in 2004, Harald Welte took a more organized public
enforcement approach and launched
[gpl-violations.org,](http://gpl-violations.org/) a website and
mailing list for collecting reports of GPL violations. On the basis of
these reports, Welte successfully pursued many enforcement actions in
Europe, including formal legal action. Harald earns the permanent fame
as the first copyright holder to bring legal action in a court
regarding GPL compliance.

In 2007, two copyright holders in BusyBox, in conjunction with the
Software Freedom Conservancy ("Conservancy"), filed the first
copyright infringement lawsuit based on a violation of the GPL in the
USA. While lawsuits are of course quite public, the vast majority of
Conservancy's enforcement actions are resolved privately via
cooperative communications with violators. As both FSF and Conservancy
have worked to bring individual companies into compliance, both
organizations have encountered numerous violations resulting from
preventable problems such as inadequate attention to licensing of
upstream software, misconceptions about the GPL's terms, and poor
communication between software developers and their management. This
document highlights these problems and describe best practices to
encourage corporate Free Software users to reevaluate their approach
to GPL'd software and avoid future violations.

^1^[]{#_bookmark171 .anchor}One example is the public outcry over
NeXT's attempt to make the Objective-C front-end to GCC proprietary.
RMS, in fact, handled this enforcement action personally and the
Objective-C front-end is still part of upstream GCC today.

Both FSF and Conservancy continue GPL enforcement and compliance
efforts for software under the GPL, the GNU Lesser Public License
(LGPL) and other copyleft licenses. In doing so, both organizations
have found that most violations stem from a few common, avoidable
mistakes. All copyleft advocates hope to educate the community of
commercial distributors, redistributors, and resellers on how to avoid
violations in the first place, and to respond adequately and
appropriately when a violation occurs.

## Who Has Compliance Obligations?

All distributors of modified or unmodified versions of copylefted
works unmodified versions of the works have compliance obligations.
Common methods of modifying the works include innumerable common acts,
such as:

-   embedding those works as executable copies into a device,

-   transferring a digital copy of executable copies to someone else,

-   posting a patch to the copylefted software to a public mailing list.

Such distributors have obligations to (at least) the users to whom
they (or intermediary parties) dis- tribute those copies. In some
cases, distributors have obligations to third parties not directly
receiving their distribution of the works (depending on the
distributors chosen licensing options, as described later in
[15.1).](#binary-distribution-permission) In addition, distributors
have compliance obligations to upstream parties, such as preservation
of reasonable legal notices embedded in the code, and appropriate
labeling of modified versions.

Online service providers and distributors alike have other compliance
obligations. In general, they must refrain from imposing any
additional restrictions on downstream parties. Most typically, such
compliance problems arise from "umbrella licenses:" EULAs, or
sublicenses that restrict downstream users' rights under copyleft.
(See [7.3](#gplv2-6-gpl-my-one-and-only) and
[9.13).](#gplv3-10-explicit-downstream-license)

Patent holders having claims reading on GPL'd works they distribute
must refrain from enforcing those claims against parties to whom they
distribute. Furthermore, patent holders holding copyrights on GPLv3'd
works must further grant an explicit patent license for any patent
claims reading on the version they dis- tributed, and therefore cannot
enforce those specific patent claims against anyone making, using or
selling a work based on their distributed version. All parties must
refrain from acting as a provider of services or distributor of
licensed works if they have accepted, or had imposed on them by
judicial action, any legal conditions that would prevent them from
meeting any obligation under GPL. (See *ยง*
[7.5,](#gplv2-7-give-software-liberty-or-give-it-death) *ยง*
[9.14](#gplv3-11-explicit-patent-licensing) and *ยง*
[9.15.](#gplv3-12-familiar-as-gplv2-7)

## What Are The Risks of Non-Compliance?

Copyleft experts have for decades observed a significant mismatch
between the assumptions most businesses make about copyleft compliance
and the realities. Possibly due to excessive marketing of proprietary
tools and services from the for-profit compliance industry, businesses
perennially focus on the wrong concerns. This tutorial seeks to
educate those businesses about what actually goes wrong, what causes
disputes, and how to resolve those disputes.

Many businesses currently invest undue resources to avoid unlikely
risks that have low historical incidence of occurrence and low cost of
remediation, while leaving unmanaged the risks that have historically
resulted in all the litigation and other adverse outcomes. For
example, some "compliance industry"[^2^](#_bookmark174) vendors insist
that great effort must be expended to carefully list, in the menus or
manuals of embedded electronics products, copyright notices for every
last copyright holder that contributed to the Free Software included

^2^[]{#_bookmark174 .anchor}"Compliance industry" refers to
third-party for-profit companies that market proprietary software
tools and/or consulting services that purport to aid businesses with
their Free Software license compliance obligations, such as those
found in GPL and other copyleft licenses. This tutorial leaves the
term in quotes throughout, primarily to communicate the skepticism
most of this tutorial's authors feel regarding the mere existence of
this industry. Not only do copyleft advocates object on principle to
proprietary software tools in general, and to their ironic use
specifically to comply with copyleft, but also to the "compliance
industry" vendors' marketing messaging, which some copyleft advocates
claim as a cause in the risk misassessments discussed herein. Bradley
M. Kuhn, specifically, regularly uses the term "compliance industrial
complex" [to analogize the types
of](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military-industrial_complex)
[problems in this industry to those warned against in the phrase of
origin.](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Military-industrial_complex)

in the product. While nearly all Free Software licenses, including
copylefts like GPL, require preservation and display of copyright
notices, failure to meet this specific requirement is trivially
remedied. Therefore, businesses should spend just reasonable efforts
to properly display copyright notices, and note that failure to do so
is simply remedied: add the missing copyright notice!

## Understanding Who's Enforcing

The mismatch between actual compliance risk and compliance risk
management typically results from a misunderstanding of licensor
intentions. For-profit businesses often err by assuming other actors
have kindred motivations. The primary enforcers of the GPL, however,
have goals that for-profit businesses will find strange and perhaps
downright alien.

Specifically, community-oriented GPL enforcement organizations (called
"COGEOs" throughout the re- mainder of this tutorial) are typically
non-profit charities (such as the FSF and Software Freedom Conser-
vancy) who declare, as part of their charitable mission, advancement
of software freedom for all users. In the USA, these COGEOs are all
classified as charitable under the IRS's 501(c)(3) designation, which
is reserved for organizations that have a mission to enhance the
public good.

As such, these COGEOs enforce GPL primarily to pursue the policy goals
and motivations discussed throughout this tutorial: to spread software
freedom further. As such, COGEOs are unified in their primary goal to
bring the violator back into compliance as quickly as possible, and
redress the damage caused by the violation. COGEOs are steadfast in
their position in a violation negotiation: comply with the license and
respect freedom.

Certainly, other entities do not share the full ethos of software
freedom as institutionalized by COGEOs, and those entities pursue GPL
violations differently. Oracle, a company that produces the GPL'd
MySQL database, upon discovering GPL violations typically negotiates a
proprietary software license separately for a fee. While this practice
is not one a COGEO would undertake nor endorse, a copyleft license
technically permits this behavior. To put a finer point on this
practice already discussed in [12.2,](#business-models) copyleft
advocates usually find copyleft enforcement efforts focused on extract
alternative proprietary licenses distasteful at best, and a corrupt
manipulation of copyleft at worst. Much to the advocates' chagrin,
such for-profit enforcement efforts seem to increase rather than
decrease.

Thus, unsurprisingly, for-profit adopters of GPL'd software often
incorrectly assume that all copyright holders seek royalties.
Businesses therefore focus on the risk of so-called "accidental"
(typically as the result of unsupervised activity by individual
programmers) infringe copyright by incorporating "snippets" of
copylefted code into their own proprietary computer program.
"Compliance industry" flagship products, therefore, focus on "code
scanning" services that purport to detect accidental inclusions. Such
effort focuses on proprietary software development and view Free
Software as a foreign interloper. Such approach not only ignores
current reality that many companies build their products directly on
major copylefted projects (e.g., Android vendor's use of the kernel
named Linux), but also creates a culture of fear among developers,
leading them into a downward spiral of further hiding their necessary
reliance on copylefted software in the company's products.

Fortunately, COGEOs regard GPL compliance failures as an opportunity
to improve compliance. Every compliance failure downstream represents
a loss of rights by their users. The COGEOs are the guardian of its
users' and developers' rights. Their activity seeks to restore those
rights, and to protect the project's contributors' intentions in the
making of their software.

