
[]{#_bookmark176 .anchor}**CHAPTER 14**

BEST PRACTICES TO AVOID COMMON VIOLATIONS

Unlike highly permissive licenses (such as the ISC license), which
typically only require preservation of copy- right notices, licensees
face many important requirements from the GPL. These requirements are
carefully designed to uphold certain values and standards of the
software freedom community. While the GPL's re- quirements may
initially appear counter-intuitive to those more familiar with
proprietary software licenses, by comparison, its terms are in fact
clear and quite favorable to licensees. Indeed, the GPL's terms
actually simplify compliance when violations occur.

GPL violations occur (or, are compounded) most often when companies
lack sound practices for the incorporation of GPL'd components into
their internal development environment. This section introduces some
best practices for software tool selection, integration and
distribution, inspired by and congruent with software freedom
methodologies. Companies should establish such practices before
building a product based on GPL'd software.[^1^](#_bookmark178)

## Evaluate License Applicability

Political discussion about the GPL often centers around determining
the "work" that must be licensed under GPL, or in other words, "what
is the derivative and/or combined work that was created". Nearly ever
esoteric question asked by lawyers seek to consider that question
[^2^](#_bookmark179) (perhaps because that question explores exciting
legal issues while the majority of the GPL deals with much more
mundane ones). Of course, GPL was designed primarily to embody the
licensing feature of copyleft.

However, most companies who add complex features to and make
combinations with GPL'd software are already well aware of their more
complex obligations under the license that require complex legal
analysis. And, there are few companies overall that engage in such
activities. Thus, in practical reality, this issue is not relevant to
the vast majority of companies distributing GPL'd software.

Thus, experienced GPL enforcers find that few redistributors'
compliance challenges relate directly to combined work issues in
copyleft. Instead, the distributions of GPL'd systems most often
encountered typically consist of a full operating system including
components under the GPL (e.g., Linux, BusyBox) and components under
the LGPL (e.g., the GNU C Library). Sometimes, these programs have
been patched or slightly improved by direct modification of their
sources, and thus the result is unequivocally a modified version.
Alongside these programs, companies often distribute fully
independent, proprietary programs,

^1^[]{#_bookmark178 .anchor}This document addresses compliance with
GPLv2, GPLv3, LGPLv2, and LGPLv3. Advice on avoiding the most common
errors differs little for compliance with these four licenses.
[18.1](#lgpl-compliance) discusses the key differences between GPL and
LGPL []{#_bookmark179 .anchor}compliance.

2This tutorial in fact also addresses the issue at length in *ยง*
[14.1.](#evaluate-license-applicability)

developed from scratch, which are designed to run on the Free Software
operating system but do not combine with, link to, modify, derive
from, or otherwise create a combined work with the GPL'd
components.[^3^](#_bookmark181) In the latter case, where the work is
unquestionably a separate work of creative expression, no copyleft
provisions are invoked. The core compliance issue faced, thus, in such
a situation, is not an discussion of what is or is not a combined,
derivative, and/or modified version of the work, but rather, issues
related to distribution and conveyance of binary works based on GPL'd
source, but without Complete, Corresponding Source.

As such, issues of software delivery are the primary frustration for
GPL enforcers. In particular, the following short list accounts for at
least 95% of the GPL violations ever encountered:

The violator fails to provide required information about the presence
of copylefted programs and their applicable license terms in the
product they have purchased.

The violator fails to reliably deliver [complete, corresponding
source](#ccs-definition) (CCS) for copylefted programs the violator
knew were included (i.e., the CCS is either delivered but incomplete,
or is not delivered at all).

Requestors are ignored when they communicate with violator's published
addresses requesting fulfill- ment of businesses' obligations.

This tutorial therefore focuses primarily on these issue. Admittedly,
a tiny minority of compliance situations relate to question of
derivative, combined, or modified versions of the work. Those
situations are so rare, and the details from situation to situation
differ greatly. Thus, such situations require a highly fact-dependent
analysis and cannot be addressed in a general-purpose document such as
this one.

Most companies accused of violations lack a basic understanding of how
to comply even in the straight- forward scenario. This document
provides those companies with the fundamental and generally applicable
prerequisite knowledge. For answers to rarer and more complicated
legal questions, such as whether your software is a derivative or
combined work of some copylefted software, consult with an
attorney.[^4^](#_bookmark182)

This discussion thus assumes that you have already identified the
"work" covered by the license, and that any components not under the
GPL (e.g., applications written entirely by your developers that
merely happen to run on a Linux-based operating system) distributed in
conjunction with those works are separate works within the meaning of
copyright law and the GPL. In such a case, the GPL requires you to
provide complete corresponding source (CCS)[^5^](#_bookmark183) for
the GPL'd components and your modifications thereto, but not for
independent proprietary applications. The procedures described in this
document address this typical scenario.

## Monitor Software Acquisition

Software engineers deserve the freedom to innovate and import useful
software components to improve products. However, along with that
freedom should come rules and reporting procedures to make sure that
you are aware of what software that you include with your product.

The most typical response to an initial enforcement action is: "We
didn't know there was GPL'd stuff in there". This answer indicates
failure in the software acquisition and procurement process.
Integration of third-party proprietary software typically requires a
formal arrangement and management/legal oversight before the
developers incorporate the software. By contrast, developers often
obtain and integrate Free Software without intervention nor oversight.
That ease of acquisition, however, does not mean the oversight is any
less necessary. Just as your legal and/or management team negotiates
terms for inclusion of any proprietary software, they should gently
facilitate all decisions to bring Free Software into your product.

Simple, engineering-oriented rules help provide a stable foundation
for Free Software integration. For example, simply ask your software
developers to send an email to a standard place describing each new
Free Software component they add to the system, and have them include
a brief description of how they will

^3^[[]{#_bookmark182 .anchor}]{#_bookmark181 .anchor}However, these
programs do often combine with LGPL'd libraries. This is discussed in
detail in [18.1.](#lgpl-compliance)

^4^If you would like more information on the application of derivative
works doctrine to software, a detailed legal discussion is presented
in our colleague Dan Ravicher's article, *Software Derivative Work: A
Circuit Dependent Determination* and in

*ยง* []{#_bookmark183 .anchor}[14.1](#evaluate-license-applicability)
of this tutorial.

5For more on CCS, see *ยง* [5.1](#gplv2-2-share-and-share-alike) and
*ยง* [9.3](#gplv3-1-understanding-ccs) of this tutorial.

incorporate it into the product. Further, make sure developers use a
revision control system (such as Git or Mercurial), and store the
upstream versions of all software in a "vendor branch" or similar
mechanism, whereby they can easily track and find the main version of
the software and, separately, any local changes. Such procedures are
best instituted at your project's launch. Once chaotic and
poorly-sourced develop-

ment processes begin, cataloging the presence of GPL'd components
becomes challenging.

Such a situation often requires use of a tool to "catch up" your
knowledge about what software your product includes. Most commonly,
companies choose some software licensing scanning tool to inspect the
codebase. However, there are few tools that are themselves Free
Software. Thus, GPL enforcers usually recommend the GPL'd [FOSSology
system,](http://fossology.org/) which analyzes a source code base and
produces a list of Free Software licenses that may apply to the code.
FOSSology can help you build a catalog of the sources you have already
used to build your product. You can then expand that into a more
structured inventory and process.

## Track Your Changes and Releases

As explained in further detail below, the most important component of
GPL compliance is the one most often ignored: proper inclusion of CCS
in all distributions of GPL'd software. To comply with GPL's CCS
requirements, the distributor *must* always know precisely what
sources generated a given binary distribution. In an unfortunately
large number of our enforcement cases, the violating company's
engineering team had difficulty reconstructing the CCS for binaries
distributed by the company. Here are three simple rules

to follow to decrease the likelihood of this occurrence:

-   Ensure that your developers are using revision control systems
    > properly.

-   Have developers mark or "tag" the full source tree corresponding to
    > builds distributed to customers.

Check that your developers store all parts of the software development
in the revision control system, including readmes, build scripts,
engineers' notes, and documentation.

Your developers will benefit anyway from these rules. Developers will
be happier in their jobs if their tools already track the precise
version of source that corresponds to any deployed binary.

## Avoid the "Build Guru"

Too many software projects rely on only one or a very few team members
who know how to build and assemble the final released product. Such
knowledge centralization not only creates engineering redundancy
issues, but also thwarts GPL compliance. Specifically, CCS does not
just require source code, but scripts and other material that explain
how to control compilation and installation of the executable and
object code.

Thus, avoid relying on a "build guru", a single developer who is the
only one who knows how to produce your final product. Make sure the
build process is well defined. Train every developer on the build
process for the final binary distribution, including (in the case of
embedded software) generating a final firmware image suitable for
distribution to the customer. Require developers to use revision
control for build processes. Make a rule that adding new components to
the system without adequate build instructions (or better yet,
scripts) is unacceptable engineering practice.

